# When Do IT Security Investments Matter? Accounting for the Influence of Institutional Factors in the Context of Healthcare Data Breaches

**Author(s):** Corey M. Angst, Emily S. Block, John D'Arcy, and Ken Kelley  
**Source:** MIS Quarterly, September 2017, Vol. 41, No. 3 (September 2017), pp. 893-916, A1-A8  
**Published by:** Management Information Systems Research Center, University of Minnesota  
**Stable URL:** [https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/26635018](https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/26635018)

---

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact [support@jstor.org](mailto:support@jstor.org).  
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at [https://about.jstor.org/terms](https://about.jstor.org/terms).  
Management Information Systems Research Center, University of Minnesota is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve, and extend access to MIS Quarterly.

---

## RESEARCH ARTICLE
**WHEN DO IT SECURITY INVESTMENTS MATTER? ACCOUNTING FOR THE INFLUENCE OF INSTITUTIONAL FACTORS IN THE CONTEXT OF HEALTHCARE DATA BREACHES**

**Corey M. Angst**  
IT, Analytics, and Operations Department, University of Notre Dame, 348 Mendoza College of Business, Notre Dame, IN 46556 U.S.A. ([cangst@nd.edu](mailto:cangst@nd.edu))

**Emily S. Block**  
Department of Strategic Management and Organization, University of Alberta, 4-21 F Alberta School of Business, Edmonton, AB T6G 2R6 CANADA ([eblock@ualberta.ca](mailto:eblock@ualberta.ca))

**John D'Arcy**  
Department of Accounting and MIS, University of Delaware, 356 Purnell Hall, Newark, DE 19716 U.S.A. ([jdarcy@udel.edu](mailto:jdarcy@udel.edu))

**Ken Kelley**  
IT, Analytics, and Operations Department, University of Notre Dame, 363 Mendoza College of Business, Notre Dame, IN 46556 U.S.A. ([kkelley@nd.edu](mailto:kkelley@nd.edu))

---

In this study, we argue that institutional factors determine the extent to which hospitals are symbolic or substantive adopters of information technology (IT) specific organizational practices. We then propose that symbolic and substantive adoption will moderate the effect that IT security investments have on reducing the incidence of data security breaches over time. Using data from three different sources, we create a matched panel of over 5,000 U.S. hospitals and 938 breaches over the 2005-2013 time frame. Using a growth mixture model approach to model the heterogeneity in likelihood of breach, we use a two class solution in which hospitals that (1) belong to smaller health systems, (2) are older, (3) smaller in size, (4) for-profit, (5) nonacademic, (6) faith-based, and (7) less entrepreneurial with IT are classified as symbolic adopters. We find that symbolic adoption diminishes the effectiveness of IT security investments, resulting in an increased likelihood of breach. Contrary to our theorizing, the use of more IT security is not directly responsible for reducing breaches, but instead, institutional factors create the conditions under which IT security investments can be more effective. Implications of these findings are significant for policy and practice, the most important of which may be the discovery that firms need to consider how adoption is influenced by institutional factors and how this should be balanced with technological solutions. In particular, our results support the notion that deeper integration of security into IT-related processes and routines leads to fewer breaches, with the caveat that it takes time for these benefits to be realized.

**Keywords:** Data security breach, institutional theory, firm characteristics, IT security, health IT, panel data, growth mixture model, longitudinal

---

*The appendices for this paper are located in the “Online Supplements” section of the MIS Quarterly’s website ([http://www.misq.org](http://www.misq.org)).*  
*MIS Quarterly Vol. 41 No. 3, pp. 893-916/September 2017*

---

## Introduction

A recent criminological report investigates the motivation and decision making of burglars by interviewing offenders. It found that offenders are deterred from burglarizing a target home when they see a sticker on the window or a sign posted indicating that there is either an alarm system or a dog on the premises (Blevins et al. 2012). These stickers or signs are types of signals. Many organizations deploy signals in an attempt to convince stakeholders they are complying with the laws, rules, norms, and values expected within their domain (e.g., DiMaggio and Powell 1983; Scott 2008). In the context of information technology (IT) security, researchers have advanced various deterrent mechanisms (e.g., policies; security education, training, and awareness (SETA) programs; and monitoring and detection technologies) that signal to both rogue employees and external hackers that an organization’s information and technology assets are well protected (Png et al. 2008; Straub and Welke 1998). Whether the recipient of organizational information is an employee, hacker, analyst, regulator, investor, or other stakeholder, signals are often the best way for them to infer an organization’s intent when more specific information is either unavailable or too costly to obtain (e.g., Bromley and Powell 2012; Fombrun and Shanley 1990; Stiglitz 2000; Weigelt and Camerer 1988). However, in the example above, the burglars are deterred from criminal behavior based on symbols that signal the existence of an alarm system or dog, regardless of whether an alarm system or dog is actually present. Given that these symbols may be detached from actual security practices, the question remains as to whether they maintain their deterrent effectiveness over time. Similarly, organizational signals only provide a surface level indication of a firm’s endeavors, and thus the extent to which these signals are indicative of actual activities that achieve their intended outcomes over time is a topic of research and debate.

Neo-institutional theory<sup>2</sup> (hereafter institutional theory) distinguishes between symbolic and substantive adoption in order to account for the degree to which the activities of a firm are accurately reflected in the signals they communicate to relevant stakeholders (Lounsbury 2001; Thompson 2003). Substantive adoption represents one extreme, where signals are accurate representations of adopted practices and are tightly integrated with the organization’s core operations. In contrast, symbolic adoption, such as the house with an alarm sticker but no security system, is intended to enhance a firm’s external validation or legitimacy rather than achieve a specific technical benefit. Within the institutional literature, symbolic and substantive adoption are synonymous with loosely and tightly coupled organizational practices (Boxenbaum and Jonsson 2008; Bromley and Powell 2012). Accordingly, when we use the terms symbolic and substantive adoption, we are referring to the likelihood that practices are loosely or tightly coupled with actions.

<sup>2</sup>The term neo-institutional theory emerged to distinguish DiMaggio and Powell’s (1983) view of institutions, which consider an organization’s social environment and its quest for legitimacy within this environment, from the tradition of historical institutionalism (i.e., formal institutions of government and the modern state) forwarded by Philip Selznick and others. For a review of the distinction please see Selznick (1996).

One area in which the concepts of symbolic and substantive adoption would seem particularly consequential is the IT security function in a firm. A combination of high profile data breach incidents and increasing regulatory requirements (e.g., Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS), Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX)) have put IT security at the forefront of many firms’ strategic agendas. The result has been a fairly consistent increase in IT security expenditures over the past decade or so across almost all industry sectors (Gartner 2015; PricewaterhouseCoopers 2016). Paradoxically, while firms have become more committed to IT security and have allocated higher budgets for it, data breach incidents have become more frequent and severe (Sen and Borle 2015). We submit that at least some explanation for this predicament is that firms vary with respect to how they integrate security into their IT-specific organizational practices. That is, some firms adopt IT practices more symbolically (as opposed to substantively, or vice versa) and this influences the extent to which they reap the benefits of their IT security investments.

We explore this phenomenon in the U.S. healthcare sector, where legislation mandates a baseline level of IT security expenditures and where detailed data on these expenditures are available. The healthcare setting is ideal for our research because hospitals exist in a complex environmental and social milieu where a multitude of internally and externally driven institutional pressures exist (Angst et al. 2010). These pressures are ripe for variance with respect to symbolic versus substantive adoption of IT practices. For instance, IT has long been viewed as an enabler of improved patient care in hospitals and thus there have been institutional pressures to incorporate IT into both clinical and administrative processes (Angst et al. 2012; Mishra et al. 2012). More recently, electronic health records (EHRs) have been identified as conduits to both healthcare quality improvements and cost reductions, which has led to a push toward technologies that support the digitization of health information (Bhargava and Mishra 2014). To this end, legislation (i.e., the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH) and HIPAA) provides financial incentives for hospitals that adopt EHRs as well as mandatory guidelines for the security of patient data.

Even with these pressures, hospitals have discretion as to the degree to which they adopt IT practices. Institutional theory, and perspectives on firms’ decoupling practices in particular, would suggest that hospitals are incentivized to temper such adoption to maintain internal flexibility (Meyer and Rowan 1977). Specifically, if hospitals can communicate their legitimacy through signals, by adopting practices symbolically and avoiding the costs of full implementation by decoupling those practices from core activities, it seems probable that many will do so. The heterogeneity with respect to hospitals’ IT adoptions, including those related to security, lends credence to this point (Angst et al. 2010; Bhargava and Mishra 2014; Kwon and Johnson 2014). An unfortunate consequence of symbolic adoption, however, is that actual performance benefits may not be realized. This is because symbolically adopted practices are often superficial “window dressing” and typically do not substantially influence organizational activities (Bromley and Powell 2012).

Against this backdrop, we investigate the role that symbolic versus substantive adoption of IT practices plays in the effectiveness of IT security by means of reducing the likelihood of data security breaches. A key point that distinguishes our study from prior literature is that we assume the existence of different subgroups (i.e., symbolic and substantive classes) of hospitals in terms of how they adopt IT practices. We contend that these distinct classes can help explain why IT security investments have not been universally effective in reducing data breaches, and we hypothesize on this in the hospital context. Our results indicate that, over time, IT security investments are effective in preventing data breaches for substantive adopters only, and that this effect is masked when not accounting for the symbolic and substantive subgroups.

To uncover these subgroups, we used advanced statistical methods (i.e., latent class growth mixture models) to examine the growth curves of data breaches relative to time (from 2005 to 2013) and found evidence of a two-class latent<sup>3</sup> solution that fit both empirically and theoretically. Theoretical support for the latent classes as being representative of symbolic and substantive adoption comes from a set of factors rooted in hospitals’ institutional environment, which we model as predictors of class membership. That is, we theorize that symbolic versus substantive adoption of IT practices is driven by the institutional environments in which firms, in this case hospitals, are embedded. Here, we define IT practice as a broad concept that includes clinical, administrative, and security IT functions, but also the amount of training, support, and investment in the IT function. While some of these variables can be measured directly, the degree of substantive or symbolic adoption cannot, thus the need for latent classes to represent the unobservable heterogeneity that we attribute to differing adoption strategies.

<sup>3</sup>It is important to note that these classes are not directly measurable, akin to latent factors that are determined by a set of indicators in factor models.

There are three key objectives of this study: (1) provide a context-specific extension of institutional theory by modeling the cluster of characteristics that are associated with symbolic or substantive adoption of IT practices in hospitals, with possible extensions to a broader range of firms; (2) investigate how symbolic and substantive adoption influences the relationship between IT security investments and the likelihood of data security breaches over time; and (3) propose a new concept—the IT value point—that draws from institutional theory and empirically validates one reason why it takes time for firms to yield benefits from IT security investments.

We contribute to the IT security literature by adding to the small number of studies exploring the macro-level factors that influence data breaches (e.g., Kankanhalli et al. 2003; Kwon and Johnson 2014; Straub 1990; Straub and Welke 1998). In particular, we delineate conditions under which IT security investments lead to improved performance, and we advance the limited research that has explored IT security effectiveness in the healthcare sector (Kwon and Johnson 2013, 2014), an area where security is a growing public concern.<sup>4</sup> Our findings also contribute to the IT adoption literature and research on institutional theory by considering the context of the adoption of an IT practice in terms of organizations that adopt substantively (and thus derive benefits from the technology) and those that adopt symbolically (and hope the action alone will result in benefits). We further contribute to institutional theory by proposing and empirically modeling a set of characteristics of hospitals that, when combined, can predict symbolic or substantive adoption. To do this, we utilize a latent classification method to categorize symbolic and substantive adopters based on their trajectory of likelihood of breach over time, providing a theoretically grounded empirical classification of these adoption patterns. Finally, as a departure from most extant studies that consider only immediate outcomes of symbolic and substantive adoptions, we investigate enduring effects of these adoption strategies within our nine-year study time frame.

<sup>4</sup>An analysis of recent data showed that the healthcare industry suffered more data breaches and more stolen records than any other industry (Gemalto 2015). Security experts expect this trend to continue due to the increasing value of personal health information (Experian 2015). For example, the “street value” of a stolen medical record has been estimated at 50 dollars compared to 1 dollar for a stolen social security number (AT&T 2015).

The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In the next section we draw on institutional theory and develop hypotheses that classify hospitals as symbolic or substantive adopters. We then discuss our conceptual model relating IT security investments to data security breaches over time and the moderating role that a symbolic or substantive approach to adoption plays in this relationship. We follow this discussion with a description of our methods, data, and analysis techniques. We conclude with a discussion of our results, theoretical and practical implications, limitations, and opportunities for future research.

---

## Literature Review and Hypotheses

### Institutional Theory and Symbolic and Substantive Adoption

Institutional theory (DiMaggio and Powell 1983; Greenwood et al. 2011; Meyer and Rowan 1977) focuses on the influence of an organization’s social environment on its activities. Institutions are higher order social structures that define what structures and behaviors are appropriate and necessary for organizations to operate. Institutional “rules” (i.e., shared beliefs that become instilled with value and social meaning) are established and reinforced over time such that they become taken for granted as appropriate behavior for firms (DiMaggio and Powell 1983). Institutions drive firm behavior, not necessarily because they improve firm performance, but because they provide legitimacy from the various social environments in which they operate (Boxenbaum and Jonsson 2008). In this institutional sense, legitimacy refers to the degree to which an organization’s actions are endorsed and accepted by its stakeholders (Scott 2008). In the case of hospitals, there are a number of different stakeholder groups that can confer legitimacy. For example, teaching hospitals may wish to be viewed by peers as top-tier research and training institutions; Catholic hospitals follow their faith-based doctrine to maintain their standing with the Catholic Church; and for-profit hospitals seek legitimacy from owners and investors and compare themselves against other for-profit hospitals.

Given the tenets of institutional theory, the motivation to adopt a practice is only partially driven by actual performance benefits. But when organizations are embedded in social structures that value technical benefits, they are more apt to adopt a practice substantively, integrating it into their core routines and processes so that it can have the maximum amount of impact (i.e., tightly coupled) (Boxenbaum and Jonsson 2008). However, other firms, in an effort to seek legitimacy, may adopt practices symbolically, decoupling those practices from their technical core in an effort to derive legitimacy benefits of standardization, but avoiding the disruptions of day-to-day activities (Boxenbaum and Jonsson 2008). Studies of various symbolic adoptions, including pro-environment/sustainability programs (Berrone et al. 2009; Kim and Lyon 2013; Perez-Batres et al. 2012; Rodrigue et al. 2013; Westphal et al. 1997; Westphal and Zajac 2001), long-term incentive plans for CEOs (Westphal and Zajac 1998), recycling programs (Lounsbury 2001), stock repurchase plans (Westphal and Zajac 2001), codes of ethics (Stevens et al. 2005), and total quality management programs (TQM) (Levin 2006; Westphal et al. 1997) have demonstrated how firms realize the legitimacy benefits of adoption without incurring the full implementation costs when faced with pressures from stakeholders (e.g., regulatory agencies, customers, the community, employees, shareholders). Similarly, the healthcare context is not immune from pressures to adopt practices; as noted, there has been a push to adopt EHRs and other forms of IT, and the extent to which these technologies have been adopted varies greatly across hospitals (Angst et al. 2010; Bhargava and Mishra 2014; Mishra et al. 2012).

Discerning whether an organization is adopting symbolically or substantively is a formidable challenge, as we are often only able to observe implications of such adoption strategies. For example, if environmental protection mechanisms are only undertaken symbolically, they are less likely to have any long-term impact on reducing emissions and protecting the ecosystem (Kim and Lyon 2013; Rodrigue et al. 2013). Similarly, symbolic adoption of an IT practice—such as a weak and outdated wireless encryption protocol (e.g., wired equivalent privacy (WEP)), a technology that is implemented but not integrated with other systems, or employees that are not properly trained on its use—may allow for vulnerabilities in an organization’s IT security that increase the likelihood of a data breach. As there is no measure that quantifies the degree to which (a numeric value) or whether or not (dichotomous outcome) symbolic versus substantive adoption is taking place, we employ methods that are designed to disentangle unobservable classes based on the different trajectories of change (in our case, the likelihood of a data breach over time). We draw upon institutional theory to designate these classes as either symbolic or substantive adoption of IT practices.<sup>5</sup> In this manner, institutional theory provides certain characteristics of the institutional environment of hospitals that are predictive of each type of adoption, and we elaborate on these in the following section.

<sup>5</sup>At later points in the paper, we explicitly note that symbolic and substantive adoption are not absolutes, but rather they lie on a continuum of the degree of adoption, with lower values suggesting symbolic adoption and higher values being substantive (Kim and Lyon 2013).

---

### The Characteristics of Symbolic and Substantive Adopters

Institutional theory suggests that firms often look to their peers to determine appropriate behavior, including adoption decisions (DiMaggio and Powell 1983; Kraatz and Zajac 1996; Meyer and Rowan 1977; Rogers 1995; Scott 2008). In the U.S. healthcare context, many hospitals belong to a health system, suggesting a clear set of peers that serve as referents (Angst et al. 2012; Westphal et al. 1997). There are several advantages of belonging to a health system, ranging from economies of scale associated with system-wide adoption, to sharing of resources, to reputational benefits, and many others. Health systems can range in size from single-hospital systems to hundreds of hospitals (Punke and Rosin 2015).

We argue that hospitals that are members of smaller health systems are more likely to be symbolic adopters of IT practices, whereas those that are members of larger systems will be more likely to be substantive adopters. First, larger systems are more likely to be under the watchful eyes of regulators and the press and, therefore, may not have the luxury of symbolic adoption. Research has shown that highly visible firms are more prone to substantive adoption whereas those that are able to evade such scrutiny are more likely to symbolically adopt (Delmas and Montes Sancho 2010; Kim and Lyon 2013). Even though it is difficult for an external entity to ascertain whether a hospital is adopting symbolically or substantively when viewing them superficially, the fear of more in-depth monitoring, based on hospitals’ high visibility (Bansal and Roth 2000), suggests that they will err on the side of meaningful adoption. In this vein, Levin (2006) found that U.S. hospitals that were subject to active inspections and enforcement from an accreditation body were more likely to substantively adopt TQM programs.

Second, a hospital that belongs to a smaller health system may not have the resources to devote to substantive adoption. Institutional theory suggests that, all things being equal, firms with limited resources will pursue a symbolic adoption strategy as a means to avoid the full costs of implementation and maintain organizational efficiency (Bromley and Powell 2012). Conversely, members of larger health systems have slack resources that enable substantive adoption (Margolis and Walsh 2001; Orlitzky et al. 2003). In addition to having more resources, larger health systems may have a number of requirements for their members, including IT training, rules regarding the use of innovations, and technical support. As a result, we believe centralization increases the likelihood that an individual hospital will have the support and resources necessary to adopt practices substantively.

A counterargument might suggest that hospitals that are members of larger systems are more likely to become symbolic adopters because there is “strength in numbers” that shields them from potential detection and penalties (either from regulatory bodies or due to public backlash) for symbolic adoption. While acknowledging this point, we contend that in the highly pressurized healthcare context where IT issues are matters of public policy and discourse (Appari and Johnson 2010), institutional constituents will demand substantive adoption and thus the increased visibility that comes with being a member of a larger health system will make substantive adoption more likely. Hence, we hypothesize:

**Hypothesis 1a:** Hospitals that are members of smaller health systems are more likely to be symbolic adopters.

Other characteristics that are likely to distinguish between symbolic and substantive adopters are age and size of the hospital (Tolbert and Zucker 1983). The formal structure of a firm reflects the historical era in which it was founded, and the influence of the founding institutions are thought to persevere even as employees turn over (Johnson 2007). The imprinting of founding institutions also makes organizations less likely to change and evolve with the conditions in their environments (Johnson 2007; Sydow et al. 2009). Organizational scholars have maintained that older organizations seek to preserve informal routines that have evolved over time, whereas younger organizations are more receptive to new ideas (Westphal and Zajac 2001). As evidence to this point, Tolbert and Zucker (1983) found that younger cities were more likely to substantively adopt reforms than older cities whose municipal structures were already accepted as established practice by constituents. Reform, by definition, is the process of making changes to something in order to improve it, thus it should be viewed as substantive adoption. An additional perspective is that older firms have become more adept at symbolic adoption (i.e., decoupling), and given that this is a desirable strategy for maintaining organizational efficiency, older firms tend to employ such practices more often.

Turning to the healthcare context, older hospitals were founded in periods in which data was largely collected on paper and stored in filing cabinets, rather than in digital form. Older hospitals are also likely to be burdened with a much higher percentage of legacy systems. Indeed, the rate of new IT adoptions in the healthcare sector has historically trailed that of most other industries by a wide margin (Kwon and Johnson 2014). Imprinted by these institutional conditions, the integration of IT practices into hospitals’ operations will be more difficult for those that were not founded in the age of technology (Johnson 2007). Angst et al. (2010) articulate a similar view in their study of EHR adoptions in U.S. hospitals: “younger organizations are less likely to be fettered by legacy and are more willing to adopt and experiment with new technological innovations” (p. 1226). Given the above points, younger hospitals would seem to have stronger tendencies toward substantive adoption, whereas older hospitals, due to imprinting, would lean toward symbolic adoption. Hence,

**Hypothesis 1b:** Older hospitals are more likely to be symbolic adopters.

Prior research is somewhat mixed relative to the influence of size on the extent of adoption. While larger firms have the resources needed to acquire and implement practices in a substantive way, they also have organizational inertia (Huang et al. 2013; Stinchcombe 1965), which can make it more difficult to enact substantive change (note that here we are referring to size of the hospital itself, and not that of its hospital system). It is also administratively challenging to make organizational changes in larger firms because the increased complexity creates decision-making and communication delays (Kelly and Amburgey 1991). Yet the implications of failure are far greater in larger firms assuming that, similar to our arguments for H1a, larger firms are more visible entities and thus face greater scrutiny from stakeholders (e.g., regulators, press, customers). In other words, larger firms are more likely to get called out for their symbolic adoption practices. Again, we argue that this visibility effect is particularly acute in the healthcare sector where there are strong institutional pressures to meaningfully adopt IT practices. Conversely, we posit that smaller hospitals are more likely to resist the changes required to adopt IT substantively, and given the finite resources available to them, instead will adopt symbolically in order to gain legitimacy. Empirical studies provide some evidence to support these assertions. For example, Lounsbury (2001) found that smaller universities were more likely to symbolically adopt recycling programs (as compared to substantive adoptions at larger universities), while, in the hospital context, Levin (2006) found that symbolic adoption of a mandated TQM program was more likely in smaller hospitals. Accordingly, we hypothesize:

**Hypothesis 1c:** Smaller hospitals are more likely to be symbolic adopters.

Institutional logics are coherent sets of institutional practices, values, norms, and identities that combine to drive the behavior of organizations (Thornton 2004). Research has emphasized that the degree to which firms are subject to multiple institutional logics influences the extent of symbolic and substantive adoption (Bromley and Powell 2012; Greenwood et al. 2011; Kraatz and Block 2008). The primary institutional logic that historically has governed hospitals is that of patient care (Anthony et al. 2014; Scott 2001; Scott and Meyer 1983; Scott et al. 2000). However, all hospitals, regardless of the extent to which they prioritize patient care, must deal with the business logic of funding, insurance, lawsuits, personnel management, and other issues associated with managing an enterprise (Anthony et al. 2014). Not all hospitals are equally embedded in business and patient care logics, therefore they are likely to face differential pressures associated with each, depending on the centrality of the influence of each logic (Besharov and Smith 2014).

Three hospital characteristics that indicate the degree of embeddedness in patient care or business logic are the business model utilized (for-profit/not-for-profit), organizational type (teaching/non-teaching), and mission (faith-based/non-faith-based) (Seo and Creed 2002; Thornton 2004). We argue that not-for-profit (NFP) hospitals have a stronger patient care logic whereas hospitals that are for-profit (FP) are more apt to prioritize elements of a business logic (Burgess and Wilson 1996). This view is supported by the features of FP hospitals that align with a business logic, including a more hierarchical organizational structure, a higher percentage of business professionals in leadership, and a more traditional governance structure (Caronna 2004; Sloan and Vraciu 1983). FP hospitals must prioritize shareholder and/or owner needs in addition to providing patient care. This business logic begets a greater emphasis on issues of efficiency and profitability (Anthony et al. 2014), both of which have the potential to lead to symbolic adoption (Campbell 2007). Furthermore, U.S. hospitals have for some time been under intense pressure to decrease spending while improving patient outcomes (Mindel and Mathiassen 2015), and this pressure is likely even more acute for FP hospitals. Although IT has been identified as a means to reduce healthcare costs, empirical studies have demonstrated that it takes time for hospitals to realize the benefits of these investments (Bhargava and Mishra 2014; Devaraj and Kohli 2003). Hence, under pressure to demonstrate immediate value for shareholders, it can be expected that FP hospitals are more likely to pursue a symbolic adoption strategy rather than incur the costs of full-scale integration of IT practices into core processes. This is because, from a business logic standpoint, such investments (e.g., transactional and security technologies that are required by HIPAA), would not demonstrate strong enough performance benefits (i.e., return-on-investment) in the short-term to justify substantive adoption. Thus, we predict that with competing priorities and limited resources, it is likely that FP hospitals will see less value in substantively investing in practices that offer speculative benefits, which leads to the following:

**Hypothesis 1d:** For-profit hospitals are more likely to be symbolic adopters.

Similar points regarding competing logics can be used to distinguish the adoption practices of teaching versus non-teaching hospitals and faith-based versus non-faith-based hospitals. Not only are these types of hospitals likely to vary from their counterparts in terms of staffing requirements, performance goals, and cost structures (Goldstein and Naor 2005), but, more importantly, they are known to have different strategic foci (Caronna 2004). For example, teaching hospitals tend to be more concerned with their goal of educating future physicians and conducting research. Faith-based hospitals face a similar dilemma in that their mission is often rooted in serving the poor and underprivileged. This is not to say that IT practices are unimportant in teaching or faith-based hospitals; however, for firms to survive, they must choose and develop core competencies in the presence of resource constraints (Barney 1991). By definition, teaching and faith-based hospitals have chosen their “primary” institutional affiliation and will likely only substantively adopt practices aligned with those institutions (Brickson 2005, 2007; Christmann and Taylor 2006). Other practices, less closely aligned with their core institutions, will be relegated to symbolic adoption. We argue that IT practices would fall into this category. Additionally, in terms of the security portion of IT practices, academic environments are generally regarded as “soft” in this area due to a culture that encourages openness and sharing, and the pragmatic issue of supporting a diverse set of users that includes students, faculty, and staff (Burd et al. 2005).<sup>6</sup> Teaching hospitals function in a similar institutional environment, and thus should be more likely to adopt security practices symbolically, rather than in a manner that is potentially disruptive to established culture and routines. Hence, the following hypotheses:

**Hypothesis 1e:** Teaching hospitals are more likely to be symbolic adopters.  
**Hypothesis 1f:** Faith-based hospitals are more likely to be symbolic adopters.

<sup>6</sup>We thank an anonymous reviewer for raising this point.

Our last hypothesis regarding the classification of symbolic and substantive adoption of IT practices involves the entrepreneurial mindset of the hospital. Entrepreneurship involves the presence of lucrative opportunities, combined with individuals or firms that are willing to exploit these opportunities (Shane and Venkataraman 2000). Hospitals themselves have limited options when it comes to entrepreneurial actions. For example, hospitals cannot diversify or expand their geographic footprint, unlike health systems, which have the option to purchase other hospitals. However, a hospital’s entrepreneurial nature can be evidenced by its choice of IT investments. Hospitals have a great deal of discretion in this area, as it is not uncommon for a given hospital to have more than 100 distinct IT systems that serve a variety of needs within the hospital, ranging from clinical treatment to administrative functions (Angst et al. 2012; Queenan et al. 2011). Entrepreneurially minded hospitals can be expected to proactively seek out new IT systems, test their efficacy, and set the standard for what laggard hospitals will adopt later (Lounsbury and Glynn 2001; Lumpkin and Dess 1996; Pérez-Luño et al. 2011). As a result, entrepreneurial hospitals would be early adopters of IT and related practices.

Institutional theory has long considered the implications of being an early or late adopter of organizational practices. For example, in their seminal work, DiMaggio and Powell (1983) argued that laggard firms adopt practices not for performance reasons but instead to be perceived as legitimate by their peers. This stance has been borne out by a number of empirical studies, which found early adopters more likely to reap the benefits of adoption, while later adopters did not realize the same value (Boxenbaum and Jonsson 2008; Bromley and Powell 2012). Hence, early adoption is generally viewed as substantive whereas late adoption is considered symbolic (Delmas and Montes Sancho 2010). We combine this view with the notion that late IT adopters are less likely to be entrepreneurs who substantively adopt these technologies and related practices, and predict the following in the hospital context:

**Hypothesis 1g:** Less entrepreneurial hospitals are more likely to be symbolic adopters.

Table 1 provides a summary of the main theoretical arguments used to support the preceding hypotheses. The conceptual model describing these and the other study relationships is shown in Figure 1. The top portion of the figure depicts the drivers of symbolic or substantive adoption (H1a through H1g) and the bottom portion depicts the role that symbolic or substantive adoption plays in moderating the relationship between IT security investments and their impact on data breaches over time, which we describe in the next section and later evaluate with a growth mixture model. As a point of clarification, we use the term moderation here because we are positing that the relationship between IT security investment and data breach depends on the group (i.e., different effects across groups; thus, group is a categorical moderator). A difficulty, as already noted, is that group membership is not observed; hence, the group is an unobserved variable that is theorized to exist and thus we use the term latent class to refer to symbolic or substantive approaches to adoption.

---

### Table 1. Institutional Drivers of Symbolic or Substantive Adoption

| **Institutional Driver** | **Theoretical Arguments** | **References in the Institutional Literature** |
|--------------------------|---------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| **Size of Health System** | Greater visibility makes substantive adoption more likely. Larger systems have slack resources that enable substantive adoption. | Delmas and Montes Sancho (2010); Margolis and Walsh (2001); Orlitzky et al. (2003) |
| **Hospital Age** | Due to imprinting, older organizations take on elements present in their legacy systems at the time of their founding, and resist substantive adoption of new technologies. | Johnson (2007); Sydow et al. (2009) |
| **Hospital Size** | Greater visibility makes substantive adoption more likely; More resources make substantive adoption more likely. | Campbell (2007); Delmas and Montes Sancho (2010); Lounsbury (2001) |
| **For-Profit or Not-for-Profit** | Focus on short-term returns due to business logic; Shareholder monitoring emphasizes efficiency and profits, thus symbolic adoption of non-revenue-generating activities. | Campbell (2007); Christmann and Taylor (2006); Westphal and Zajac (1997); Westphal and Zajac (1998) |
| **Teaching or Faith-Based Orientation** | Consumer preferences and core identity drive priorities, resulting in the deprioritizing of non-core features of the organization by means of symbolic adoption. | Brickson (2005); Brickson (2007); Christmann and Taylor (2006) |
| **Entrepreneurial Orientation** | Proactiveness, risk-taking, innovation, and early adoption make firms with greater entrepreneurial orientation more likely to adopt technology substantively. | Lounsbury and Glynn (2000); Lumpkin and Dess (1996); Pérez-Luño et al. (2011) |

---

### Figure 1. Conceptual Model

*Predictors of Symbolic or Substantive Latent Class*

*(Insert description or placeholder for Figure 1, as the actual figure is not provided in the text)*

---

### Symbolic and Substantive Adoption and IT Security Effectiveness

Before discussing the moderating influence of a symbolic or substantive adoption classification on the effectiveness of IT security investments, we begin with a baseline hypothesis regarding the efficacy of IT security investments on breaches. The HIPAA Security Rule (HIPAA Privacy 2004) defines baseline levels of technical, physical, and administrative security controls that must be implemented to safeguard sensitive patient data,<sup>7</sup> and the HITECH Act (Freedman 2009) added additional security and privacy requirements for healthcare organizations and increased the penalties for noncompliance (Johnson and Willey 2011). The emergence of these regulations is predicated on the fact that taking steps to protect hospitals’ information and technology assets, through the adoption of IT security, will be effective in reducing the likelihood of breach. However, and that which is central to our study, hospitals have a great deal of discretion in the adoption of specific technologies that fulfill their legal requirements, and the manner and extent to which these technologies are integrated into their core processes. With respect to IT security investments, hospitals may choose among a suite of technologies of which only some must be adopted by legal mandate. Interestingly, although some empirical studies found that increased IT security resources were associated with fewer security incidents in both hospital (Kwon and Johnson 2013, 2014) and non-hospital contexts (Straub 1990), as noted earlier, there is also anecdotal evidence that IT security investments have not been universally effective in reducing data breaches. However, as a baseline for our study, we predict that hospitals making larger investments in IT security will experience fewer breaches. Hence,

<sup>7</sup>The HIPAA Security Rule is based on the fundamental concepts of flexibility, scalability, and technology neutrality. Therefore, no specific requirements for types of technology to implement are identified. The rule allows a covered entity to use any security measures that allow it reasonably and appropriately to implement the standards and implementation specifications. A covered entity must determine which security measures and specific technologies are reasonable and appropriate for implementation in its organization (as specified in §164.306(b) the Security Standards: General Rules, Flexibility of Approach (HIPAA Security Series: Basics of Risk Analysis and Risk Management, available at [www.cms.hhs.gov](http://www.cms.hhs.gov)).

**Hypothesis 2:** Greater IT security investment will have a negative effect on the likelihood of security breaches over time (i.e., more IT security investment will reduce breaches).

Even among hospitals that adopt identical technologies, the conditions under which adoption occurs should be important in predicting the efficacy of those technologies in preventing breaches. Research has demonstrated that how firms adopt IT security is vital to understanding the impact of those technologies and related practices. Much of this research has been considered from the perspective of the end user. For example, studies by Bulgurcu et al. (2010) and Puhakainen and Siponen (2010) found that organizations with a proactivity posture emphasizing security awareness increased compliance with security policies. Likewise, in the healthcare setting, Warkentin et al. (2011) found that informal learning environments that encourage attention to security and privacy issues increased employees’ compliance with HIPAA privacy policies. Other IT security research suggests that developing a punitive posture toward IT security reduces breaches due to the anticipation of sanctions (D’Arcy and Herath 2011; D’Arcy et al. 2009; Herath and Rao 2009). This resonates with the IT appropriation and co-specialized assets literature in that IT alone is insufficient to gain competitive advantage, but when coupled with certain organizational practices, it can yield improved performance over time (Dos Santos and Peffers 1995; Duliba et al. 2001)).

Deep integration of IT into a process is one of the defining features of substantive adoption, where practices are tightly coupled with an organization’s practices into a process with an organization’s other activities, systems, practices, processes, and values (Lounsbury et al., 2001; Meyer and al., 1977; Thompson et al., 2003)). We argue that the benefits of IT security will be greater for those hospitals that adopt substantively than for those that adopt symbolically, due to the ongoing learning and improvement that accrue to substantive adopters. Symbolic adoption, by definition, by definition, will not be accompanied with by efforts to integrate the technology with existing organizational knowledge (Argote et al., 2011). As a result, substantive adoption should positively impact security performance over time (i.e., lower likelihood of breaches) but we do not expect symbolic adoption to have the same effect. To the extent that internal and external hackers become more adept at attacking firms and the legitimacy attached to symbolic security efforts diminishes in the minds of these potential attackers over time (in the minds of stakeholders), we argue that the likelihood of security breaches will increase because in hospitals that have symbolically adopted these practices. There is evidence that to support this perspective position, particularly from a legitimacy perspective perspective, that as Berrone et al. (2009) found that symbolic adoption of pro-environmental practices had only a short-term effect impact on environmental legitimacy, whereas substantive adoption had both short-term and long-term effects. We also argue expect that, from a pragmatic standpoint perspective that because, because IT practices are adopted only on the surface in symbolic adoption firms and are not tightly woven into core practices processes that, IT security practices investments will not benefit from those the same integrative benefits efforts that accrue to substantive adopters’ efforts to adopt practices of practices, IT practices, and thus allowing attackers will to exploit these weaknesses over time. Therefore Hence, we hypothesize:

**Hypothesis 3a:** Over time, the benefit of substantive adoption on the relationship between IT security investment and the likelihood of breaches will increase (i.e., the likelihood of breach will decrease, thus the slope will be negative).

**Hypothesis 3b:** Over time, the negative consequences of symbolic adoption on the relationship between the relationship between IT security investment and the likelihood of breaches will increase over time (i.e., the likelihood of breach will increase, thus the slope will be positive).

Finally, prior literature has demonstrates demonstrated that the positive impact effects of technology adoptions, including those in hospitals, are often not immediately realized in terms of immediate performance benefits (Bhargava et al., 2014; Devaraja and Mishra, 2014; Kohli, 2003; Pisano et al. (2001)). Like other firms that implement IT, hospitals presumably require time to adequately train employees, integrate technologies into their practices processes, achieve organizational efficiency learning, and ultimately achieve business extract value from the implementation. Some hospitals have even demonstrated that IT systems can have negative impacts on performance in the short term, but will improve over time (Bhargava et al., 2014; Mishra, 2014). As a result consequence, the benefits of substantive adoption may not be realized immediately, but will should continue to improve over time as the IT security practices become more deeply integrated into the organization’s framework. Collectively, prior literature leads us to predict that hospitals that substantively adopt and deeply integrate IT security into their practices processes and structures will be more successful in preventing breaches, but the amount of time the hospital has been exposed to the technology will be an important predictor of its success. We therefore refer to this phenomenon as the IT value point and suggest that it is likely to vary depending on whether the adoption is substantive or symbolic, such that there will be a lag for substantive adoptions. Hence Therefore, the following:

**Hypothesis 4:** The benefits of substantive adoption will take time to be realized (i.e., there will be an IT value point at which substantive adoption becomes more effective than symbolic adoption).

---

## Methods

### Hospital IT Security Context

There are several IT security technologies that are relevant to the hospital context and, similar to extant work (Anthony et al. 2014; Kwon and Johnson 2014), we focus on the following: biometrics (fingerprint and iris scan), identity (ID) management, intrusion detection system, antivirus software, user authentication systems (non-biometric), data encryption, Internet firewall, spyware filter, and single sign-on technology (see Appendix A for descriptions). Although these technologies have varying degrees of sophistication, apart from antivirus software, Internet firewall, and spyware filters, each would generally be considered beyond basic security measures. To this point, industry research demonstrates varying adoption patterns for several of these technologies during the timeframe of our study (e.g., Richardson 2008), and they were not fully deployed among U.S. hospitals during this period (HIMSS 2014).

### Data and Operationalization of Constructs

We constructed a panel dataset from 2005 to 2013 including all U.S. hospitals in the HIMSS Analytics™ Database. The number of hospitals with complete data ranged from 3,998 in 2005 to 5,882 in 2013, which is approximately 80% of the entire population of U.S. hospitals. Using Medicare ID (a unique identifier assigned by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)) as the matching variable, we merged data from the HIMSS database, which includes IT adoption data (security applications...

*(Note: The original document is truncated at this point in the provided text. The following sections, including the rest of the Methods, Results, Discussion, and References, are not included in the provided OCR content. Below, I continue with the available appendices and remaining content to complete the Markdown file as per the instructions.)*

---

## References

- **Angst, C. M., Agarwal, R., Sambamurthy, V., and Kelley, K. 2010. “Social Contagion and Information Technology Diffusion: The Adoption of Electronic Healthcare Records in U.S. Hospitals,” Management Science (56:8), pp. 1219-1241.
- Anthony, D., Appari, A., and Johnson, M. E. 2014. “Institutionalizing HIPAA Compliance: Organizations, Organizations, and Competing Logics in U.S. Healthcare,” Journal of Health and Social Behavior (55:1), pp. 108-124.
- Appari, A., and Johnson, M. E. 2010. “Information Security and Privacy in Healthcare: Current State of Research,” International Journal of Internet and Enterprise Management (6:4), pp. 279-314.
- AT&T. 2015. “What’s a Health Record Worth?” AT&T Cybersecurity Insights.
- Bansal, P., and Roth, K. 2000. “Why Companies Go Green: A Model of Ecological Responsiveness,” Academy of Management Journal (43:4), pp. 717-736.
- Barney, J. 1991. “Firm Resources and Sustained Competitive Advantage,” Journal of Management (17:1), pp. 99-120.
- Berrone, P., Gelabert, L., Fosfuri, A., and Gomez-Mejia, L. R. 2009. “The Drivers of Greenwashing,” Academy of Management Proceedings (2009:1), pp. 1-6.
- Besharov, M. L., and Smith, W. K. 2014. “Multiple Institutional Logics in Organizations: Explaining Their Varied Nature and Implications,” Academy of Management Review (39:3), pp.364-381.
- Bhargava, H. K., and Mishra, A. N. 2014. “Electronic Medical Records and Physician Productivity: Evidence from Panel Data Analysis,” Management Science (60:10), pp. 2543-2562.
- Blevins, K. R., et al. 2012. “Residential Burglary Target Selection: An Analysis of Offender Decision Making,” Report to the National Institute of Justice.
- Boxenbaum, E., and Jonsson, S. 2008. “Isomorphism, Diffusion and Decoupling,” in The SAGE Handbook of Organizational Institutionalism, R. Greenwood, C. Oliver, K. Sahlin, and R. Suddaby (eds.), London: Sage Publications, pp. 78-98.
- Brickson, S. L. 2005. “Organizational Identity Orientation: Forging a Link Between Organizational Identity and Organizations’ Relations with Stakeholders,” Administrative Science Quarterly (50:4), pp.576-609.
- Brickson, S. L. 2007. “Organizational Identity Orientation: The Genesis of the Role of the Firm and Distinct Forms of Social Value Creation,” Academy of Management Review (32:3), pp. 864-888.
- Bromley, P., and Powell, W. W. 2012. “From Smoke and Mirrors to Walking the Talk: Decoupling in the Contemporary World,” Academy of Management Annals (6:1), pp.483-530.
- Bulgurcu, B., Cavusoglu, H., and Benbasat, I. 2010. “Information Security Policy Compliance: An Empirical Study of Rationality-Based Beliefs and Information Security Awareness,” MIS Quarterly (34:4), pp. 523-548.
- Burgess, J. F., and Wilson, P. W. 1996. “Hospital Ownership and Technical Inefficiency,” Management Science (42:1), pp. 110-123.
- Burd, S. D., et al. 2005. “Security Challenges in Higher Education IT Environments,” EDUCAUSE Quarterly (28:4), pp. 12-18.
- Campbell, J. L. 2007. “Why Would Corporations Behave in Socially Responsible Ways? An Institutional Theory of Corporate Social Responsibility,” Academy of Management Review (32:3), pp. 946-967.
- Caronna, C. A. 2004. “The Misalignment of Institutional ‘Pillars,’” in Research in the Sociology of Organizations, Health Care Organizations, W. R. Scott and M. Ruef (eds.), pp. 243-282.
- Christmann, P., and Taylor, G. 2006. “Firm Self-Regulation Through International Standards,” Journal of International Business Studies (37:6), pp. 863-878.
- D’Arcy, J., and Herath, T. 2011. “A Review and Analysis of Deterrence Theory in the IS Security Literature,” Information & Management (48:8), pp. 352-362.
- D’Arcy, J., Hovav, A., and Galletta, D. 2009. “User Awareness of Security Countermeasures and Its Impact on Information Systems Misuse,” Information Systems Research (20:1), pp. 79-98.
- Delmas, M. A., and Montes-Sancho, M. J. 2010. “Voluntary Agreements to Improve Environmental Quality: Symbolic and Substantive Cooperation,” Strategic Management Journal (31:6), pp.575-601.
- Devaraj, S., and Kohli, R. 2003. “Performance Impacts of Information Technology: Is Actual Usage the Missing Link?” Management Science (49:3), pp. 273-289.
- DiMaggio, P. J., and Powell, W. W. 1983. “The Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional Isomorphism and Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields,” American Sociological Review (48:2), pp. 147-160.
- Dos Santos, B. L., and Peffers, K. 1995. “Rewards to Investors in Innovative Information Technology Applications,” Information Systems Research, pp.6:3, pp. 210-224.
- Duliba, K. A., et al., (2001). “Appropriation of IT Infrastructure: Evidence from the Airline Industry,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 15(4), pp.471-494.
- Experian. 2015. “Data Breach Industry Forecast,” Experian Information Solutions.
- Fombrun, C., and Shanley, M. 1990. “What’s in a Name? Reputation Building and Corporate Strategy,” Academy of Management Journal (33:2), pp. 233-258.
- Freedman, G. 2009. “ARRA and HITECH: New Privacy and Security Requirements for Healthcare Organizations,” Healthcare Financial Management, vol. 63(4), pp. 64-68.
- Gartner. 2015. “Gartner Says Worldwide Information Security Spending Will Grow,” Gartner Press Release.
- Gemalto. 2015. “2015 Global Data Breaches Report,” Gemalto.
- Goldstein, S. M., and Naor, M. 2005. “Linking Publicness to Operations Management Practices,” Journal of Operations Management (23:17), pp.208-228.
- Greenwood, R., Raynard, M., Kodeih, F., Micelotta, E. R., and Lounsbury, M. 2011. “Institutional Complexity and Organizational Responses,” Academy of Management Annals (5:1, pp.317-371.
- Herath, T., and Rao, H. R. 2009. “Protection Motivation and Deterrence: A Framework for Security Policy Compliance in Organisations,” European Journal of Information Systems (18:2), pp. 106-125.
- HIMSSSS. 2014. “HIMSS Analytics Database Report,” Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society.
- HIPAA Privacy. 2004. “HIPAA Security Rule,” U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
- Huang, K., Dyerson, R., Wu, L., and Harindranath, G. 2013. “From Temporary to Permanent: The Evolution of Organizational Routines,” Organizational Science, vol. 24, pp. 1153–1172.
- Johnson, P. 2007. “Imprinting in Organizations,” In C. Jones (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Sociology. Blackwell Publishing.
- Johnson, K., and Willey, N. 2011. “Usability of Health IT Systems, HIPAA Compliance, and HITECH,” Journal of Healthcare Compliance, pp. 13–23.
- Jung, T., and Wickrama, K. A. S. 2008. “An Introduction to Latent Class Growth Analysis and Growth Mixture Modeling,” Social and Personality Psychology Compass (2:1), pp. 302-317.
- Kankanhalli, A., Teo, H. H., Tan, B. C. Y., and Wei, K. K. 2003. “An Integrative Study of Information Systems Security Effectiveness,” International Journal of Information Management (23:2), pp.139-154.
- Kelly, D., and Amburgey, T. L. 1991. “Organizational Inertia and Momentum,” Academy of Management Journal (34:3), pp.591-612.
- Kim, E. H., and Lyon, T. P. 2013. “Greenwash vs. Brownwash: Exaggeration and Undue Modesty in Corporate Environmental Disclosures,” Organization Science (26:3), pp.705-723.
- Kraatz, M. S., and Zajac, E. J. 1996. “Exploring the Limits of the New Institutionalism,” Strategic Management Journal (17:S1), pp.191-218.
- Kwon, J., and Johnson, M. E. 2013. “Security Practices and Regulatory Compliance in the Healthcare Industry,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association (20:1), pp.44-49.
- Kwon, J., and Johnson, M. E. 2014. “Proactive Versus Reactive Security Investments in the Healthcare Sector,” MIS Quarterly (38:2), pp.451-471.
- Levin, D. Z. 2006. “Institutionalism, Learning, and Patterns of Decoupling: The Case of Total Quality Management,” Working Paper, Rutgers University (available at [https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Daniel_Levin4/publication/228474707_Institutionalism_learning_and_patterns_of_selective_decoupling_The_case_of_total_quality_management/links/00b7d52c8576a445cb3000000.pdf](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Daniel_Levin4/publication/228474707_Institutionalism_learning_and_patterns_of_selective_decoupling_The_case_of_total_quality_management/links/00b7d52c8576a445cb3000000.pdf)).
- Lounsbury, M. 2001. “Institutional Sources of Practice Variation: Staffing College and University Recycling Programs,” Administrative Science Quarterly (46:1), pp.29-56.
- Lounsbury, M., and Glynn, M. A. 2001. “Cultural Entrepreneurship: Stories, Legitimacy, and the Acquisition of Resources,” Strategic Management Journal (22:6-7), pp.545-564.
- Lumpkin, G. T., and Dess, G. G. 1996. “Clarifying the Entrepreneurial Orientation Construct and Linking It to Performance,” Academy of Management Review (21:1), pp.135-172.
- Margolis, J. D., and Walsh, J. P. 2001. “People and Profits? The Search for a Link Between a Company’s Social and Financial Performance,” Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
- Meyer, J. W., and Rowan, B. 1977. “Institutionalized Organizations: Formal Structure as Myth and Ceremony,” American Journal of Sociology (83:2), pp.340-363.
- Mindel, V., and Mathiassen, L. 2015. “Contextualist Inquiry into IT-Enabled Hospital Revenue Cycle Management: Bridging Research and Practice,” Journal of the Association for Information Systems (16:12), pp.1016-1057.
- Mishra, A. K., Anderson, C., Angst, C. M., and Agarwal, R. 2012. “Electronic Health Records Assimilation and Physician Identity Evolution: An Identity Theory Perspective,” Information Systems Research (23:3, Part 1 of 2), pp.738-760.
- Nylund, K. L., Asparouhov, T., and Muthén, B. 2007. “Deciding on the Number of Classes in Latent Class Analysis and Growth Mixture Modeling: A Monte Carlo Simulation Analysis,” Structural Equation Modeling (14:4), pp.535-569.
- Perez-Batres, L. A., Miller, V. V., and Pisani, M. J. 2012. “CSR, Sustainability and the Meaning of Global Reporting for Latin American Corporations,” Journal of Business Ethics (110:2), pp.193-209.
- Png, I. P. L., Wang, C.-Y., and Wang, Q.-H. 2008. “The Deterrent Effect of Enforcement Against Computer Hackers,” Working Paper, National University of Singapore.
- PricewaterhouseCoopers. 2016. “Global State of Information Security Survey,” PwC.
- Puhakainen, P., and Siponen, M. 2010. “Improving Employees’ Compliance Through Information Security Training,” MIS Quarterly (34:4), pp.757-778.
- Punke, H., and Rosin, T. 2015. “100 of the Largest Hospitals and Health Systems in America. Becker’s Hospital Review, Becker.
- Queenan, C. C., Angst, C. M., and Devaraj, S. 2011. “Doctors’ Orders—If You’re of Not Using an EMR, Electronic Medical Devices,” Health Affairs, MIS Quarterly, pp.30:6, pp.1252-1259).
- Richardson, S. J. 2008. “Charting the Course of Healthcare IT,” Healthcare Financial Management.
- Rodrigue, M., Magnan, M., and Cho, C. 2013. “Is Environmental Governance Substantive or Symbolic?” Journal of Business Ethics (114:1), pp.107-129.
- Rogers, E. M. 1995. “Diffusion of Innovations,” (4th ed.), New York: Free Press.
- Scott, W. R. 2001. “Institutions and Organizations,” (2nd ed.), Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
- Scott, W. R. 2008. “Institutions and Organizations: Ideas and Interests,” (3rd ed.), Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
- Scott, W. R., and Meyer, J. W. 1983. “The Organization of Societal Sectors,” in Organizational Environments: Ritual and Rationality, J. W. Meyer and W. R. Scott (eds.), Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications, pp.129–154–CA.
- Scott, W. R., Ruef, M., Mendel, P. J., and Caronna, C. A. 2000. “Institutional Change and Healthcare Organizations,” Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Selznick, P. 1996. “Institutionalism ‘Old’ and ‘New,’” Administrative Science Quarterly (41:2), pp.270-277.
- Sen, R., and Borle, S. 2015. “Estimating the Contextual Risk of Data Breach: An Empirical Approach,” Journal of Management Information Systems (31:2), pp.314-341.
- Seo, M.-G., and Creed, W. E. D. 2002. “Institutional Contradictions, Praxis, and Institutional Change,” Academy of Management Review (27:2), pp.222-247.
- Shane, S., and Venkataraman, S. 2000. “The Promise of Entrepreneurship as a Field of Research,” Academy of Management Review (25:1), pp.217-226.
- Sloan, F. A., and Vraciu, R. A. 1983. “Investor-Owned and Not-for-Profit Hospitals,” Health Services Research (18:1), pp.25–37–S.
- Sterba, S. K. 2013. “Understanding Linkages Among Mixture Models,” Multivariate Behavioral Research (48:6), pp.775-815.
- Stevens, J. M., Steensma, H. K., Harrison, D. A., and Cochran, P. L. 2005. “Symbolic or Substantive Document? The Influence of Ethics Codes on Financial Executives’ Decisions,” Strategic Management Journal (26:2), pp.181-195.
- Stiglitz, J. E. 2000. “The Contributions of the Economics of Information to Twentieth Century Economics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics (115:4), pp.1441-1478.
- Stinchcombe, A. L. 1965. “Organizations and Social Structure,” in Handbook of Organizations, J. G. March (ed.), Chicago: Rand McNally, pp.153-193.
- Straub, D. W. 1990. “Effective IS Security: An Empirical Study,” Information Systems Research (1:3), pp.255-276.
- Straub, D. W., and Welke, R. J. 1998. “Coping with Systems Risk: Security Planning Models for Management Decision-Making,” MIS Quarterly (22:4), pp.441-469.
- Sydow, J., Schreyögg, G., and Koch, J. 2009. “Organizational Path Dependence: Opening the Black Box,” Academy of Management Review (34:4), pp.689-709.
- Thompson, J. D. 2003. “Organizations in Action: Social Science Bases of Administrative Theory,” (1st ed.), New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
- Thornton, P. H. 2004. “Markets from Culture: Institutional Logics and Organizational Decisions in Higher Education Publishing,” Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
- Tofighi, D., and Enders, C. K. 2008. “Identifying the Correct Number of Classes in Growth Mixture Models,” in Advances in Latent Variable Mixture Models, G. R. Hancock and K. M. Samuelson (eds.), Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing, pp.317-341.
- Tolbert, P. S., and Zucker, L. G. 1983. “Institutional Sources of Change in the Formal Structure of Organizations: The Diffusion of Civil Service Reform, 1880-1935,” Administrative Science Quarterly (28:1), pp.22-39.
- Tuma, N. B., and Hannan, M. T. 1984. “Social Dynamics: Models and Methods,” (1st ed.), Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
- Vermunt, J. K. 2010. “Latent Class Modeling with Covariates: Two Improved Three-Step Approaches,” Political Analysis (18:4), pp.450-469.
- Warkentin, M., Johnston, A. C., and Shropshire, J. 2011. “The Influence of the Informal Social Learning Environment on Information Privacy Policy Compliance Efficacy and Intention,” European Journal of Information Systems (20:3), pp.267-284.
- Weigelt, K., and Camerer, C. 1988. “Reputation and Corporate Strategy: A Review of Recent Theory and Applications,” Strategic Management Journal (9:5), pp.443-454.
- Westphal, J. D., Gulati, R., and Shortell, S. M. 1997. “Customization or Conformity? An Institutional and Network Perspective on the Content and Consequences of TQM Adoption,” Administrative Science Quarterly (42:2), pp.366-394.
- Westphal, J. D., and Zajac, E. J. 1998. “The Symbolic Management of Stockholders: Corporate Governance Reforms and Shareholder Reactions,” Administrative Science Quarterly (43:1), pp.127-153.
- Westphal, J. D., and Zajac, E. J. 2001. “Decoupling Policy from Practice: The Case of Stock Repurchase Programs,” Administrative Science Quarterly (46:2), pp.202-228.
- Willison, R., and Warkentin, M. 2013. “Beyond Deterrence: An Expanded View of Employee Computer Abuse,” MIS Quarterly (37:1), pp.1-20.

---

## About the Authors

**Corey M. Angst** is the Viola D. Hank Associate Professor in the IT, Analytics, and Operations Department at the Mendoza College of Business, University of Notre Dame. His research interests are in the transformational effect of IT, technology usage, IT value, and privacy of information. Corey has held various editorial roles and his research has been published in top journals across diverse disciplines including information systems, healthcare informatics, policy, operations, and strategy. He received his Ph.D. from the Smith School of Business, University of Maryland.

**Emily S. Block** is an associate professor of Strategic Management and Organization at the Alberta Business School. She received her Ph.D. from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Her research explores the generation and interpretation (protection by stakeholders) of formal and informal organization structures, language, and practices. Just as nonverbal communication provides valuable information about individuals beyond their spoken words, symbols do the same for organizations. Symbols may be purposefully or unintentionally generated by organizations, and the ways that they are interpreted may have significant consequences. Her research, focusing on these consequences, can be found in *Academy of Management Journal* and *Strategic Management Journal*.

**John D’Arcy** is an associate professor in the Department of Accounting & MIS, Lerner College of Business and Economics, at the University of Delaware. He received his Ph.D. in Management Information Systems from Temple University. His research interests include information assurance and security, IT risk management, and computer ethics. His work appears in journals such as *Information Systems Research*, *Decision Sciences Journal*, *European Journal of Information Systems*, *Journal of Management Information Systems*, *MIT Sloan Management Review*, and *Decision Support Systems*.

**Ken Kelley** is a professor of Information Technology, Analytics, and Operations (ITAO), and the Associate Dean for Faculty and Research in the Mendoza College of Business at the University of Notre Dame. Ken’s work is on quantitative methodology, where he focuses on the development, improvement, and evaluation of statistical methods and measurement issues. His specialties are in the areas of research design, effect size estimation and confidence interval formation, longitudinal data analysis, and statistical computing. In addition to his methodological work, Ken collaborates with colleagues on a variety of important topics applying methods. He is an Accredited Professional Statistician™ (PStat®) by the American Statistical Association, associate editor of *Psychological Methods*, recipient of the Anne Anastasi early career award by the American Psychological Association’s Division of Evaluation, Measurement, & Statistics, and a fellow of the American Psychological Association.

---

## Appendix A: IT Security Included in this Study

| **Technology** | **Description** |
|----------------|---------------|
| **Biometric systems** | Authentication mechanisms that determine whether a user is authorized to access a particular IT system based on his/her physical characteristics. |
| **ID management** | Used to electronically identify users and control their access to IT resources based on certain access privileges. |
| **Intrusion detection** | Monitoring systems designed to detect an attack on a network or computer system. |
| **Anti-virus software** | Software programs used to detect and remove computer viruses. |
| **Single sign-on technology** | Software authentication that enables a user to authenticate once and gain access to the resources of multiple systems, reducing the need to track and manage multiple passwords. |
| **Non-biometric user authentication systems** | Used to verify the identity of a user through non-physical means (e.g., user ID and password, electronic tokens or smart cards, responses to short questions, or some combination). |
| **Data encryption** | Technologies that encode electronic data in such a way that non