# Cybersecurity and platform competition in the cloud

**Daniel G. Arce**

Ashbel Smith Professor of Economics, University of Texas at Dallas, 800 W. Campbell Rd., Richardson, TX 75080, USA

---

## ABSTRACT

Cloud computing services are examples of platforms in the classic sense of the economics of two-sided markets. In particular, indirect externalities arise in the cloud from connecting users with developers of complementary products or services. The premise investigated here is that a cloud provider's security is subject to the same rigors of two-sided market competition that shape a cloud provider's pricing and strategy. In so doing, this study demonstrates how cybersecurity shapes cloud competition and cloud competition shapes cybersecurity. Specifically, cybersecurity is shown to be a user-side phenomenon with characteristics that can lead to the coexistence of cloud services providers rather than monopoly. In addition, a user's switching costs are characterized in terms of the ratio of the potential consequence of a class break under a user's current provider against that of the competition. Finally, a component of cybersecurity is identified for which there is no technical solution.

---

## 1. Introduction

Information systems platforms are technological architectures or ecosystems that connect users with developers and providers of complementary products or services. Cloud service providers are quintessential examples of such platforms. In particular, public cloud platforms essentially convert fixed costs into variable costs for users, thereby reducing capital requirements and entry barriers. The resultant user-side transactions allow providers of Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), and Software as a Service (SaaS) to take advantage of scale economies via virtualization and multi-tenancy. Prototypical IaaS providers include Amazon Web Service (AWS), Microsoft Azure, and Google Cloud Platform. SAP Cloud Platform, Oracle Cloud Platform, and Google App Engine are examples of PaaS providers. SaaS providers include Salesforce.com, Microsoft Office 365, and Adobe Creative Cloud. In progressing from the bottom of the multilayered stack of cloud services to the top (from IaaS to PaaS to SaaS), cloud architectures become more vertically integrated in that each layer includes the services of underlying layers. The level of abstraction and complexity also increases when moving up through layers of the cloud.

Many IT complementors use cloud services to interface with millions of users and organizations. In facilitating exchange between both sides of the market, cloud services providers (hereafter, CSPs) create indirect externalities in that the value of the CSP for those on one side of the market rises with increased participation on the other side of the market. For example, application developers benefit if there are many users that adopt a CSP offering their applications. Similarly, users benefit from a CSP with many apps to choose from. Accordingly, information system platforms were motivating examples at the genesis of the economic analysis of two-sided markets. CSPs represent the current evolution of information system platforms.

At the same time, information system platforms differ from the classic analysis of two-sided markets in at least two significant ways. First, two-sided markets are often characterized by winner-take-all (WTA) competition among platforms, ultimately leading to a monopoly provider. Following Anderson (2001), the three conditions that, in combination, likely lead to a WTA outcome in IT services are (i) direct network externalities, where users' benefits from their side of the platform increase with the number of users on the same side of the platform, (ii) technology with high fixed costs and low marginal cost per additional user, and (iii) large switching costs from one platform technology to the other. Owing to the prevalence of these conditions, the literature on platform pricing and strategy largely adopts the assumption of platform-as-monopoly (e.g. Parker et al., 2016; Evans and Schmalensee, 2016; and McAfee and Brynjolfsson, 2017), with the resulting analyses being dependent upon this assumption.

In spite of this, not one of the examples of a CSP given above is a monopoly. In reality, public cloud services exist under the auspices of imperfect competition. Indeed, a high level of competition exists for CSPs at each layer of the cloud stack. Consequently, in this paper no assumption about market structure is made. Instead, a CSP's market structure is determined endogenously even though the WTA conditions continue to hold.

A second difference between two-sided markets in general and IT platforms in particular is that the latter are often plagued by miscreants seeking to co-opt the technology for nefarious uses, often to the detriment of legitimate clients, platforms, and complementors. This is, of course, a reference to hackers and cybersecurity. As CSPs deliver their services over the public internet, they are susceptible to all of the attendant security issues (DDoS, malware, etc.). Attacks can also penetrate cloud infrastructure by exploiting errors, misconfigurations, and vulnerabilities without the need to resort to malware. The cloud can additionally be used to foster attacks, as when hackers register with an IaaS and harness the IaaS's computing capacity to conduct brute force or DoS attacks without the need for botnets (Chou, 2013). Another possibility is the abuse of cloud resources, as when Tesla's AWS account was hijacked for the purposes of Bitcoin mining in 2019.

Hence, in addition to successfully connecting both sides of the market, CSPs must consider their information security investments in terms of a security breach's effects on the (in)direct benefits of the CSP. This implies that security provision is as well conducted under the rigors of two-sided market competition. Indeed, security is one of the most important assets contributing to a CSP's reputation (Bayrak et al., 2011; Forbes, 2019). Concerns over security also initially figure into the cloud adoption decision (Tang and Liu, 2015).

In particular, the security responsibility of cloud users, service providers, and cloud providers varies with the layer in the cloud architecture (Tianfield, 2012; Kolevski and Michael, 2015). For example, in IaaS, users are responsible for the security of the virtual machines made available by the CSP. The CSP is in charge of security for the hypervisor/virtual machine monitor and the VM images repository. In PaaS, service providers are responsible for API security. SaaS security is the responsibility of the cloud provider, as is web application security. It would seem, then, that users understand that they are operating in a shared security model. Yet findings in the Ponemon (2014) survey on cloud security make it clear that users are effectively relying on cloud providers to maintain security, regardless of the layer of service. Users' lack of understanding of the shared security model continues to be a major contributing factor to insecurities in the cloud (CSA, 2019). Perhaps this is due to unfounded trust, but it may also be because a user's IT department understands that in any layer of the cloud there are provider applications that are invisible to IT. As such, a user may not have the technical capacity to accurately assess whether their CSP is supplying the security controls it claims to provide. Another possibility is that technical leadership on the part of CSPs instils a false sense that security has been outsourced as well. No matter the rationale, users appear to equate cloud adoption with a reduction in their security burden.

For this reason the focus here is on the user side and the CSP strategy of providing user security. Exploits and vulnerabilities diminish the value of the CSP to the user. Consequently, it is posited that security is subject to the same disciplinary forces of two-sided market competition that shape a CSP's pricing structure and other strategies, such as whether to make the service feature-rich versus minimalist, or the choice between proprietary versus open source (Sen et al., 2011). For example, CSP coexistence requires that in equilibrium no users switch from one CSP to another. CSP security satisfying the no-switching requirement is consistent with CSP coexistence. This is a non-trivial requirement, as security has been shown to be an influential predictor of CSP switching behavior (Wilms et al., 2018).

As such, one contribution of this paper is demonstrating how cybersecurity shapes CSP competition and CSP competition shapes cybersecurity. Another is that, what little economic literature exists on platform coexistence focuses mainly on the complementor/developer side of the market. At the same time, a two-sided market can sustain multiple platforms only if coexistence also holds on the user side. This study derives the conditions on security that lead to platform coexistence on the user side of the CSP market. In addition, rather than specifying users' switching costs exogenously, they are instead derived and characterized endogenously as part of the equilibrium conditions on security. Together, these phenomena imply that cloud cybersecurity must increasingly account for both the breakdown in the shared security model and the potential for class breaks. Moreover, a component of cybersecurity that cannot be addressed with either technical proficiency or efficiency is shown to exist.

The analysis proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a brief review of the literature on platform security and the economics of platform coexistence. Section 3 presents a model of CSP competition on security for the user side of the market. From the perspective of two-sided market competition, monopoly is regarded as a corner solution and CSP coexistence as an interior solution or market structure. Section 4 derives the criteria for determining when the market structure is interior and characterizes CSP security in terms of these criteria. A discussion of the economic and cybersecurity interpretations of this characterization occurs in Section 5. For example, the CSPs' security strategies are shown to be strategic complements. Section 6 consists of a brief conclusion and bullet points summarizing the implications of this investigation.

---

## 2. Related literature

This section focuses on those contributions to the literature on platform security and platform coexistence that are closely related to the analysis at hand. In so doing, the differences between the present and preceding analyses are delineated in order to foreshadow the model presented in the following section. In addition, the meaning of the term 'platform' in the majority of this section is that corresponding to the economics of two-sided markets. From the economic perspective, a platform is a provider of information technology services that facilitates interactions between users and third-party complementors as well as with users and proprietary products of the platform. User-complementor interactions create value for those on both sides of the market as well as for the platform itself. In terms of CSPs, platform competition within the context of two-sided markets includes IaaS and SaaS in addition to PaaS.

In a WTA outcome there is little incentive for the dominant platform to further complicate its relationship with developers via increased security standards (Anderson, 2001). Initially at least, user security creates little value-added between a platform and potentially adopting complementors because increased security raises development costs. The commensurate decrease in the number of apps also decreases users' indirect externalities and, hence, the platforms' and complementors' revenues. Moreover, an externality is present, as the consequences of insecurity fall primarily on users, whereas the platform provides users' security, which is costly for the platform to do. In addition, if an exploit diffuses between users (i.e. contagion) this as well gives a rationale for a monopoly platform to provide minimal security (Lelarge, 2009). Specifically, for low quality contagion protection, users' demand for security will be high because of direct network externalities; users protect themselves owing to the high possibility of contagion. For high quality contagion protection, users' demand will be lower because of the free rider effect; a user relies on a neighbor's protection to protect themselves from contagion. Consequently, a profit-maximizing monopoly takes advantage of the increased demand stemming from low-security protection.

If the market structure is instead imperfectly competitive, the characterization of security substantially changes. Assuming two or more competing firms engaged in e-commerce, Liao and Chen (2014) characterize three phases of security. First, surviving the initial phase of competition allows for greater claims on total market profits in the future. As investments in security increase, the commensurate likelihood that a firm will survive (assuming users abandon demonstrably insecure firms) implies that security investment is akin to a first-mover advantage. In the second stage, the number of security-investing firms reaches a critical mass that allows for free riding. Additional investment in security only occurs in reaction to the identification and announcement of firm-specific vulnerabilities by a third party. In the third and final stage, security matures to the point that the survival claim on profits sufficiently offsets the incentive to free ride.

A natural conclusion is that the character of security is sensitive to economic incentives that are a function of the structure of the market. One can take this a step further by recognizing that the strategic incentives inherent in two-sided markets also affect security. That is, the actions of competitors matter as well. For example, Garcia et al. (2014) consider a two platform model where the security of a platform is defined as the probability that a randomly-selected hacker does not target the platform, i.e. security-as-deterrence. Given this environment, the authors show that the long-run platform market structure depends on hackers' sensitivity to market share asymmetries. Furthermore, platform providers with lower market share compete by providing higher security at lower prices.

When the platform is the problem, that is, when an exploit is designed to take advantage of holes or vulnerabilities in the platform itself, as is often the case, this directly diminishes the utility that users derive from the platform. Insecurity can result in a class break in that the entire class of users of the platform are vulnerable, as may be their associated systems once users are compromised (Schneier, 2000). In particular, multi-tenancy is a distinct feature of public clouds because virtualization allows for the scale economies that makes a CSP's business model profitable. Multi-tenancy facilitates class breaks because all clients are exposed to bugs and security vulnerabilities in commonly used apps, operating systems, and service providers. This concentration of resources multiplies the impact of cyberattacks (ENISA, 2012).

Common user misconfigurations can also lead to class breaks. User misconfigurations and lack of cloud security architecture and strategy rank numbers two and three in the CSA's (2019) "Egregious 11" top threats to cloud computing. According to an IBM X-Force Report (2019), misconfiguration is now the biggest risk to cloud security. For example, during the summer of 2019 a former AWS employee exploited a misconfigured Capital One server to obtain the credentials needed to steal 106 million Capital One records stored on AWS. Perhaps as many as 30 other AWS clients were similarly breached. This is even though AWS offers its clients monitoring tools designed to detect such misconfigurations. Unfortunately, Capital One was not alerted to the breach by AWS or its available monitoring tools. Subsequent to the breach, AWS ran its own tests and alerted clients if they had a similar misconfiguration.

This is an example of how the lack of understanding of the shared responsibility model allows for misconfigurations due to changes in control resulting from cloud adoption. At the very least, it suggests that the shared security model is a coordination problem for CSPs and their clients. Pym and Sadler (2010) as well see the potential for security problems in the cloud stemming from mismatched expectations about meta-level responsibilities.

In sum, class breaks can occur in the cloud because of multi-tenancy, common user misconfigurations, and coordination failures in the shared security model. Given the potential for class breaks, the standard here, the platform - becomes part of the threat. Consequently, security breaches interact with the (in)direct externalities associated with the platform in a non-separable way. For this reason, the current analysis considers an entirely different definition of security than that in Garcia et al. (2014). Owing to the interaction between security and a platform's (in)direct externalities, security is instead defined as the probability that an attack is unsuccessful rather than the probability it induces hackers to target a competitor instead. The criteria for establishing the coexistence of competing platforms is commensurately different as well. The coexistence criteria involve (i) no-switching constraints for the users of the platform, (ii) requiring a platform's provision of security to be incentive compatible for the cross-platform distribution of users, and (iii) a no-loss (participation) constraint for each platform.

Lee (2014) invokes these coexistence criteria for the complementor side of platforms, showing that platforms can coexist if each offers potential complementors a menu of participation-contingent contracts. Such contracts are contingent transfers dependent upon the number of complementors ultimately joining the platform. An example is app exclusivity, where high quality applications are developed and reserved for the platform, with the platform providing a contingent transfer to the complementor. These transfers are regarded as the outcome of multilateral bargaining between the platform and complementors. This practice lends itself to the coexistence of platforms because, on the complementor side of the platform, an increase in the number of participants often translates into increased competition. Hence, Lee shows that contingent transfers allow competing platforms to coexist without appealing to congestion effects, coordination problems, or multiple platforms that simultaneously employ a portfolio of WTA strategies (e.g. early entry, exclusive licensing, subsidized pricing, and app variety).

By contrast, contingent transfers based on the number of participants are rare on the user side. The need to create indirect network effects for complementors and scale economies for the platform by increasing the user base via prices that are subsidized is a recognized potentiality. But these low prices are generally not a function of the number of users. Alternatively, platform security is related to a platform's number of users, thereby leading to a multi-platform outcome on the user side, as is shown below. This is novel because the nascent literature on competing platforms has largely focused on the conditions for producing non-monopolistic outcomes on the complementor side, but platform competition cannot truly be non-monopolistic unless coexistence is similarly established on the user side.

Another example of the security/market share nexus is provided by Arce (2018). He considers a game where users' direct externalities from a platform stem from the platform's market share and malware creators target a platform based upon its market share as well. In terms of the model to come, given N users in total, n users of platform 1, and exogenous security levels p and q for platforms 1 and 2, respectively, Arce characterizes the Nash equilibrium relationship between a platform's relative market share and relative vulnerability as n/(N − n) = √(1 – q)/(1 − p). This characterization holds regardless of the functional form used to express users' direct network externalities. By contrast, in this study the security levels are endogenous and determined by the process of platform competition. Moreover, the structure of the user side of the market (one or two platforms) is endogenous as well.

---

## 3. Description of the model

From the perspective of platform economics, a CSP facilitates a two-sided market, one involving complementors (e.g. application developers) and the other involving users. The focus here is on the interplay between CSP security and users. There are two potential CSPs, with a set of potential users, N = {1, 2, ..., N}, each of which can select CSP i ∈{1, 2}. The number of users choosing CSP 1 is n ∈ N, and the number of those choosing CSP 2 is N-n. Users cannot multi-home (choose more than one CSP). Allowing for multi-homing would on its own weaken the competition between the two CSPs, thereby decreasing the likelihood of monopoly. This is because, by definition, multi-homing violates the WTA requirement that switching costs exist.

The security of CSPs 1 and 2 are p(n) and q(n), respectively, which are interpreted as the probability of a successful defense against attacks. Similarly, the vulnerability of CSP 1 is 1 - p(n), and CSP 2's vulnerability is 1 - q(n). Specifying a CSP's security or vulnerability in this way is consistent with Littlewood et al. (1993) appeal for a, "probability-based framework for operational security measurement" that is, "conditional on upon the effort process" of the attacking adversaries. A simple software measure in this vein can be based on the number of defects per lines of code (Vaughn et al., 2003). A more involved measure that is appropriate for networks is Jha et al.'s (2002) reliability metric, which estimates the probability of an adversary not succeeding in an attack. Ramos et al. (2017) provide a survey of techniques for generating these probabilities via state-space stochastic models, attack graphs, Bayesian networks, conversion of common vulnerability scoring system (CVSS) scores, or information theory. Modeling security/vulnerability as a probability is also consistent with Gordon and Loeb (2002), Nagurney and Nagurney (2015), Ruan (2017), and Arce (2018).

In this study, p(n) and q(n) are determined by technological capability, the attack surface, attack activity, and the competitive environment. Security probabilities p(n) and q(n) are functions of n because, "in a shared multi-tenant environment enabled by a public cloud, as the number of users is increasing, security risks are getting more intensified and diverse" (Tianfield, 2012). In particular, security is a function of n because of the possibility of social engineering as well as hacker targeting based on market share. Under social engineering, the attack surface of a CSP is a function of the total number of users of the CSP and the number of user devices connected to the CSP (Miller, 2011; Krombholz et al., 2015). Moreover, many employees use personal devices to access cloud-based services and apps, thereby blurring network boundaries and increasing the attack surface. In addition to its multi-tenant character, CSPs involve both virtualization and shared resources, thereby making security again a function of n. This dependency also holds because attacks by malicious tenants of the CSP can arise from within. Finally, vulnerability, as represented by 1 - p(n) and 1 - q(n), differs from congestion because there is no tradeoff between decreasing congestion and complementors' costs of development, whereas a tradeoff exists between increasing security and development costs.

The CSPs are differentiated in that users' reservation utility can differ across CSPs for a given number of users, but it is assumed that each user's reservation utility, U(n), is identical for a given CSP, i ∈ {1, 2}. For modeling purposes, a convention is adopted whereby both U₁(n) and U₂(n) are expressed as functions of the number of users of CSP 1, n, with U₁(n) being (weakly) increasing in n and U₂(n) conversely (weakly) decreasing in n (as there are N - n users of CSP 2). This dependence on n is for two reasons. First, users experience positive direct network externalities on the user side of the CSP, meaning that users' benefit from their CSP is increasing in the number of other users of that CSP. This is characteristic of a WTA environment. No further assumption is made as to whether the rate of change is increasing, decreasing, or constant. Second, owing to indirect externalities, the number of complementors on the other side of the CSP is influenced by and influences n. Finally, it follows that U₁(0) = U₂(N) = 0; a CSP without users has a reservation value of zero.

An important assumption is that, in addition to direct and indirect network effects, U(n) captures all net benefits associated with CSP 'i' other than the security values p(n) or q(n). Examples include user-side CSP differentiation such as pricing, ease of use, and compatibility; and complementor-side differentiation such as the number and variety of apps offered. This assumption about U(n) facilitates a focus on security via the analysis of expected utilities E₁(p, n) and E₂(q, n), which are functions of p(n) and U₁(n), and q(n) and U₂(n), respectively. Lee (2014) makes a similar assumption for the payoffs of complementors in order to focus on how contracting between a platform and complementors can lead to platform coexistence on the complementor side of the market. Lee does not, however, address the user side of the market or cybersecurity.

Cloud vulnerabilities negatively affect the utility of users. In particular, if a successful attack occurs owing to vulnerabilities in the CSP, then - from the users' perspective - the CSP is part of the problem. As such, users receive diminished utility from the CSP and its associated network externalities. The diminished utility from CSP i's vulnerability is given by V(n). This vulnerability captures a CSP's resilience, ability to recover, data protection standards, and so on. Given that V(n) is measured in comparable units to U(n), and both U₁(n) and U₂(n) are expressed in terms of the number of users of CSP 1, n, then so are V₁(n) and V₂(n). In particular, for CSP 1, 0 ≤ V₁(n) ≤ U₁(n), with the second inequality being strict for n ≠ 0. To wit, if CSP 1 suffers a successful attack, a user's associated loss is U₁(n) – V₁(n). Similarly, the diminished utility from a successful attack on CSP 2 is V₂(n), where 0 ≤ V₂(n) < U₂(n), with the second inequality being strict for n ≠ N. The loss associated with a successful attack on CSP 2 is U₂(n) – V₂(n).

In this way, the effect of CSP security is two-fold. First, security acts as the gatekeeper for user access to everything else that differentiates the CSP in that it determines the expected value of using the CSP based on p(n) or q(n). Second, security is not merely another dimension of product differentiation. Insecurity determines the degree to which all other dimensions of CSP differentiation are degraded under a breach via V(n). That is, insecurity is as well an argument within the expected value. To see this, the expected payoffs for using CSPs 1 and 2 are:

E₁(p, n) = p(n)U₁(n) + (1 − p(n))V₁(n) and
E₂(q, n) = q(n)U₂(n) + (1 – q(n))V₂(n).

In completing the description of users' expected payoffs, note that no participation constraints are needed because, by definition, U(n) ≥ V(n) ≥ 0, ∀ n ∈ N, ∀ i = 1, 2. Hence, users always select a CSP. For this reason, it is also assumed that CSP 1 breaks all ties. That is, if E₁(p, n) = E₂(q, n), then users select CSP 1.

In specifying a CSP's cost structure of security it is helpful to distinguish between the case where the units of measurement are with respect to a change in the number of users, Δn, versus that of a change in the level of security across a CSP's total user base, Δp(n) or Δq(n). Specifically, the marginal cost of producing security for an additional user is negligible, which is consistent with the WTA conditions. Nevertheless, increasing the level of security for the user base is assumed to have constant marginal cost, c₁, c₂ > 0, for each respective CSP. For example, c₁ > 0 can be the marginal cost associated with producing a security patch for CSP 'i,' which increases CSP i's security for its user base, Δp(n). At the same time, providing the patch to an additional user, Δn, has a marginal cost of zero. The term c₁p(n) is CSP 1's total cost for providing level of security p(n) across its user base, and c₂q(n) is CSP 2's total cost of security level q(n) for its user base. Consequently, there is an incremental cost for increasing a CSP's level of security for its entire attack surface. These costs reflect a CSP's underlying technology of security. If interpreted instead on a per user basis, c₁p(n) and c₂q(n) are each CSP's respective fixed costs, with the associated marginal cost per additional user being zero. This is again consistent with the WTA conditions.

As is standard in platform economics, each CSP has a component in its payoff that is a function of its number of users, specified here as Π₁(n) and Π₂(n). Similar to the specification of U(n) for users, Π(n) captures all non-security aspects of CSP i's payoff, including pricing, profits, and the number of participants on the complementor side of the market. The CSP's net profits are a function of its security, the cost structure of which is discussed above. In addition, p(n), q(n) ∈ [0, 1). That is, no CSP is perfectly secure. Also, a CSP without users has no incentive to invest in security: p(0), q(N) = 0. As such, each CSP's payoff is:

Π₁(p, n) = Π₁(n) – c₁p(n) and Π₂(q, n) = Π₂(n) – c₂q(n).

What remains to be determined is whether or not differences in security among CSPs can sustain multi-CSP competition on the user side of the market. This is the subject of the next section.

---

## 4. Cybersecurity and cloud service provider competition

Given these properties of users and CSPs, this section describes and derives the conditions on CSP security such that the CSP structure is interior in n. By 'interior' it is meant that the CSP market is bifurcated (duopolistic). This is the simplest example of a multi-CSP market, also known as market-splitting or platform coexistence. In particular, an interior solution has the following three properties. First, in order that CSP competition does not degenerate into a WTA contest, it must be the case that, in equilibrium, CSP 1 users do not want to switch to CSP 2 and vice-versa. Similarly, in equilibrium no CSP finds it profitable to add any users from the pool of potential users, N. Finally, a CSP must make a profit (or at least break even) given its number of users. The effect of each of these three requirements on a CSP's security, p(n) and q(n), is now considered in turn.

In an interior solution, each CSP sets its level of security such that no user will switch to the other CSP. That is, CSP 'i' must satisfy a no-switching constraint, NS, i ∈ {1, 2}. Recall that, for expected profits E₁(p, n) and E₂(q, n), the value of n refers to the number of users of CSP 1, and this is also the case for the arguments over which the expected value is taken: U₁(n), U₂(n), V₁(n), V₂(n), p(n), and q(n). It follows that, if a user of CSP 1 switches to CSP 2, there are n-1 remaining users of CSP 1. Hence, no-switching requires that the expected payoff for using CSP 1 is at least that for switching to CSP 2: E₁(p, n) ≥ E₂(q, n-1). That is:

p(n)U₁(n) + (1 − p(n))V₁(n) ≥ q(n − 1)U₂(n − 1) + (1 - q(n - 1))V₂(n − 1).

Similarly, if a CSP 2 user switches to CSP 1, there will be n + 1 users of CSP 1. Consequently, the no-switching condition for CSP 2, E₂(q, n) ≥ E₁(p, n + 1), is:

q(n)U₂(n) + (1 – q(n))V₂(n) ≥ p(n + 1)U₁(n + 1) + (1 − p(n + 1))V₁(n + 1).

Together, (NS₁) and (NS₂) establish the conditions under which, given p(n) and q(n), no user wants to switch to the other CSP.

It is useful to simplify (NS₁) and solve for q(n-1):

q(n-1) ≤ p(n) * [U₁(n) - V₁(n)] / [U₂(n-1) - V₂(n-1)] + [V₁(n) - V₂(n-1)] / [U₂(n-1) - V₂(n-1)]

Similarly, simplifying (NS₂) and solving for p(n + 1):

p(n+1) ≤ q(n) * [U₂(n) - V₂(n)] / [U₁(n+1) - V₁(n+1)] + [V₂(n) - V₁(n+1)] / [U₁(n+1) - V₁(n+1)]

Eqs. (1) and (2) express the no-switching equilibrium conditions in terms of the primitives of the model: the U's and V's. Although the equations appear to be dynamic, they are, in fact, static characterizations of an outcome in which no user has an incentive to switch its CSP.

An equilibrium must also have the property that no CSP finds it profitable to pursue additional users. Specifically, given p(n) it must be the case that CSP 1's profits will not increase if it changes its level of security in order to attract an additional user, Π₁(p(n), n) > Π₁(p(n + 1), n + 1). Similarly, CSP 2 cannot increase its profits by changing its level of security, q(n), to attract an additional user. That is, for n to be interior it must also be the case that each CSP's level of security is incentive compatible. For CSP 1 this implies:

Π₁(n) – c₁p(n) > Π₁(n + 1) – c₁p(n + 1).

Substituting in the value of p(n + 1) from (2) and solving for p(n) derives CSP 1's incentive-compatible level of security:

p(n) = q(n) * [U₂(n) - V₂(n)] / [U₁(n+1) - V₁(n+1)] + [V₂(n) - V₁(n+1)] / [U₁(n+1) - V₁(n+1)] - [Π₁(n+1) - Π₁(n)] / c₁

Similarly, CSP 2's incentive compatibility constraint, Π₂(q(n), n) > Π₂(q(n-1), n-1), is:

Π₂(n) – c₂q(n) > Π₂(n − 1) – c₂q(n - 1).

Substituting in the value of q(n-1) from (1) and solving for q(n):

q(n) = p(n) * [U₁(n) - V₁(n)] / [U₂(n-1) - V₂(n-1)] + [V₁(n) - V₂(n-1)] / [U₂(n-1) - V₂(n-1)] - [Π₂(n-1) - Π₂(n)] / c₂

Finally, each CSP must not be making a loss. This is expressed through the following participation constraints:

Π₁(n) – c₁p(n) ≥ 0, and

Π₂(n) – c₂q(n) ≥ 0.

**RESULT:** When p(n) and q(n) jointly satisfy (IC₁), (IC₂), (PC₁), and (PC₂), then CSP competition is interior in n. That is, multiple CSPs or market-splitting occurs.

This result is novel for several reasons. First, it shows that CSP markets can be interior based on differences in cybersecurity. Specifically, CSP competition on security can produce an interior solution under WTA conditions. In contrast, previous analyses of platform coexistence emphasize the complementor side of the market (e.g. locking in apps via exclusivity agreements). Second, a symbiotic relationship exits whereby cybersecurity shapes CSP competition and CSP competition shapes cybersecurity. The implications of this characterization are discussed in the next section. Finally, p(n) and q(n) are expressed in terms of the primitives of the model, namely, user preferences/utility and CSP profits and costs.

---

## 5. Characterization and implications

CSP competition shapes cybersecurity in ways that can be characterized in economic terms. To illustrate this, conditions (IC₁) and (IC₂) below are restatements of conditions (IC₁) and (IC₂), where the attributes of security levels p(n) and q(n) are identified and expressed in terms of the economics of CSP competition on security.

p(n) = q(n) * [U₂(n) - V₂(n)] / [U₁(n+1) - V₁(n+1)] + [V₂(n) - V₁(n+1)] / [U₁(n+1) - V₁(n+1)] - [Π₁(n+1) - Π₁(n)] / c₁

q(n) = p(n) * [U₁(n) - V₁(n)] / [U₂(n-1) - V₂(n-1)] + [V₁(n) - V₂(n-1)] / [U₂(n-1) - V₂(n-1)] - [Π₂(n-1) - Π₂(n)] / c₂

These equations specify the best replies for each CSP. To begin, with reference to the first right-hand term in each equation, p(n) and q(n) are increasing functions of the other CSP's security, q(n) and p(n). Consequently, p(n) and q(n) are strategic complements. Moreover, when strategies are strategic complements, a second-mover advantage exists (in the Stackelberg sense). This implies that neither CSP is willing to preemptively commit to a security strategy and let its competitor react to it. By contrast, the price of anarchy cannot be characterized without further assumptions because the security strategies are not plain substitutes nor plain complements. This is because a CSP's security strategy does not enter directly into the payoff of its competitor. Consequently, any characterization of the price of anarchy requires specifying explicit functional forms for the CSPs' payoffs and will hinge on that specification.

In what follows, the Result is interpreted in terms of CSP 1, understanding that equivalent properties hold for CSP 2. The logic of the CSP market structure-security relationship determined by these conditions is illustrated for CSP 1 in Fig. 1. The comparative statics of the terms on the right-hand side of (IC₁) determine whether p(n) increases or decreases. This change in the security level p(n) then determines whether or not (PC₁) is tightened or loosened. For example, if p(n) increases, owing to an exogenous change in the right-hand side of (IC₁), the less likely it is that (PC₁) is met, and, therefore, the conditions for an interior market structure are violated. If violated, then the CSP market is monopolistic. Similarly, any comparative static that decreases p(n) through (IC₁) makes it more likely that (PC₁) holds, thereby allowing for CSP coexistence.

From this perspective, the attention that a CSP receives from hackers reduces p(n) and makes an interior solution all-the-more likely. Hence, hacking attention based on market share contributes to CSP coexistence. In contradistinction, the greater is the marginal cost per unit of security, c₁, the tighter (PC₁) becomes, instead making monopoly more likely. It follows that, if the marginal technological costs of increasing security are high, a CSP monopoly is likely. This marginal condition, which is with respect to the level of security and not the number of users, has not been previously associated with WTA outcomes. It also substantiates the folk wisdom about monopolies providing low security. By (PC₁), a high technological cost of security, c₁, that leads to monopoly also lowers the upper bound on the CSP's provision of security.

A WTA outcome is often associated with the joint occurrence of (i) direct network effects, (ii) high fixed costs of production and low marginal cost per additional user, and (iii) high switching costs. As laid out in Section 3, the primitives for the users and CSPs satisfy properties (i) and (ii). Hence, CSP coexistence depends on the relationship between security and switching costs. Users' switching costs are measured in terms of the ratio of marginal utilities (also known as the marginal rate of substitution) where the unit of change corresponds to the effect of a breach on each CSP, which is [U₂(n)-V₂(n)]/[U₁(n + 1)-V₁(n + 1)] for CSP1. This is the first right-hand term in (IC₁), which is the marginal rate of substitution for a user of CSP 2 that is considering a switch to CSP 1 net of the effect of a breach in each CSP. According, it can also be thought of as the loss ratio for being in CSP 2 versus switching to CSP 1. Intuitively, the greater this ratio is, the less likely it is that users will remain in CSP 2 or the more likely it is that users will switch to CSP 1. From (IC₁), an increase in this ratio increases p(n), thereby making it less likely that (PC₁) is met, which works against the occurrence of an interior outcome.

As an application, suppose that CSP 1 is AWS. AWS creates significant direct network effects, which is one reason why it is popular. At the same time, a vulnerability in AWS implies a vulnerability for all users of AWS. Consequently, the potential for a class break exists for an exploit. This means that the denominator in the first two right-hand terms of (IC₁), U₁(n + 1) – V₁(n + 1), is large because a class break represents a negative direct network externality, thereby reducing p(n) owing to the consistently higher targeting and consequences of an attack. A lower value of p(n) makes it more likely that the CSP's participation constraint holds. Hence, the potential for a class break increases the scope for an interior solution. Applying this logic to (IC₂), where the magnitude of 1's class break is in the numerator of the first right-hand term, implies that CSP 1's less popular rival must compete by increasing its security, q(n). But the rival's ability to compete on q(n) is bounded by its participation constraint, q(n) ≤ Π₂/c₂. Should this constraint be violated, then CSP 1 will become a monopoly (with a low level of security). For example, given that Microsoft Azure and Google Cloud Platform exist alongside AWS, they need to compete with AWS on the basis of security. However, there is a limit to the degree that they can do so, as captured by their participation constraint.

The relationship between market structure and cybersecurity is symbiotic, meaning that the implications of this model also run in the direction from market structure to cybersecurity. The increased CSP-provided security that results from CSP competition is consistent with the perceived breakdown in the shared security model of the cloud (Ponemon Institute, 2014; CSA, 2019). This means that CSP security will increasingly have to be designed to circumvent potential class breaks originating from the user side or the interface between users' IT and the cloud, as was the case in the summer of 2019 for Capital One and other AWS users with similar misconfigurations. Hence, AWS's search for clients with misconfigurations subsequent to Capital One's breach is likely to become a proactive part of a CSP's standard operating procedures for providing security. Rather than merely providing users with security tools, CSPs will either have to assist with the application of these tools or apply the tools themselves.

In addition, the effect of the loss ratio for switching is augmented by the relative impact of switching under a successful attack, V₂(n) - V₁(n + 1), as given by the second term on the right-hand side of (IC₁). Under a successful attack, users of CSP 2 experience diminished utility, V₂(n). A user that switches to CSP 1 instead experiences V₁(n + 1) under a successful attack. That is, the relative status of a CSP subsequent to an attack is part of users' calculus of CSP selection. Some CSPs suffer attacks better than others or face less consequential attacks, especially given variations in the extent and objectives of information stewardship at the CSP level (Pym and Sadler, 2010). This makes the role of cybersecurity in the CPS's value proposition for users all-the-more apparent. Security is inherently a part of a CSP's competitive advantage. Cybersecurity can no longer be regarded as ancillary to cloud operations (Gariba and Van Der Poll, 2017), nor can it be regarded as a cost center. Specifically, if V₂(n) – V₁(n + 1) < 0, CSP 1 is preferred under the relative breach impact criterion. From (IC₁), this preference for CSP 1 decreases p(n), thereby making it more likely that (PC₁) is met and an interior outcome occurs. Being relatively vulnerability resistant allows the CSP to be less secure because breaches are not as damaging.

The V's capture a CSP's safeguarding of confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information; as well as its resiliency, ability to recover, and so on. What the result shows is that not only is the loss under a successful exploit, U(.) – V() is of interest to CSP 'i' users, but so is the relative vulnerability between CSPs, e.g. V₂(n) – V₁(n + 1). This is consistent with Wilm et al. (2018) empirical findings that it is not so much the attractiveness of a competitor's other services that induces a user to switch CSPs, but rather the current CSP's relatively low perceived level of security features. In the present model, the differences in security features are captured by the terms V₂(n) – V₁(n + 1) and V₁(n) - V₂(n - 1).

Finally, security is decreasing in the CSP's opportunity cost of forgoing an additional user, Π₁(n + 1) – Π₁(n). If Π₁(n + 1) - Π₁(n) is positive, it captures the tradeoff of forgoing the initiation of WTA competition. Hence, if this difference is positive, p(n) can take a lower value because the CSP does not augment its security to get that additional user. It is therefore more likely that (PC₁) holds and the conditions for an interior solution are met.

The cybersecurity implication of this third component is quite profound. The value of the numerator, Π₁(n + 1) – Π₁(n), is wholly independent of any part of the model that is directly related to cybersecurity. To borrow a phrase from Hardin (1968), this is the component of cybersecurity for which, "there is no technical solution." A novel characteristic of this model is that, as a CSP becomes more technically efficient at providing cybersecurity, thereby decreasing c₁, the greater the component of cybersecurity without a technical solution figures into a CSP's actual level of cybersecurity. In particular, Π₁(n + 1) – Π₁(n) captures the components of CSP profits that are driven by users' and complementors' (in)direct network externalities stemming from the CSP. These are the non-security aspects of the CSP that attract users and complementors to the CSP. For example, in Rochet and Tirole (2003)'s specification of two-sided markets, Π₁(n) is expressed a function of the product, n·m, where m is the number of complementors of CSP 1. As the term n·m corresponds to the CSP's potential transaction volume, the values of n and m drive the scale economies that lie at the foundation of a CPS's rationale for existence.

---

## 6. Conclusion

The premise investigated here is that CSP security reflects the rigors of two-sided market competition. CSP security is defined in terms of the probability that an attack is unsuccessful. For example, it is well-established that, as monopolies have no competition, they provide minimal security. By extension, if the market shares of CSPs are interior (duopolistic), then security must be consistent with the equilibrium requirements for an interior market structure. Hence security is not uniquely a technical issue, it must also satisfy no-switching constraints for users and incentive compatibility constraints for CSPs.

Moreover, the switching costs determining whether CSP competition is monopolistic or duopolistic are derived rather than exogenously specified. Specifically, they are characterized in terms of the relative loss ratios for the CSPs. For example, the increased vulnerabilities associated with class breaks that capitalize on the substantial direct network externalities present in popular CSPs imply that their less popular rivals need to compete on the basis of security. This means increasing the likelihood that an attack is unsuccessful and decreasing the impact of a successful breach. Paradoxically, it also implies that a high degree of adoption can work against CSP monopoly owing to the potential for a class break.

The novel implications of this study can be summarized as follows:

*   In addition to being critical to a CSP's reputation, cybersecurity is a determinant of the market structure (competitive environment) on the user-side of an IaaS, PaaS, or SaaS market.
*   The cybersecurity properties of a CSP can be expressed in non-technical requirements that relate to the two sides of the market that a CSP serves. Namely, (i) the preferences of users, (ii) the degree to which security breaches diminish the usefulness of the CSP to users, and (iii) the profits of complementors. Owing to the presence of (in)direct network externalities, (i) and (iii) are primarily functions of the number of users and complementors, whereas only (ii) is directly related to the CSP's technical proficiency in security.

These first two points can be summarized as cybersecurity symbiosis: cybersecurity shapes CSP competition and CSP competition shapes cybersecurity. Continuing,

*   Cybersecurity has no technical solution in that the more proficient or efficient that a CSP becomes in cybersecurity provision, the greater nontechnical issues become in determining a CSP's level of security. These nontechnical aspects are those drivers of CSP profits that go into determining a CSP's number of users, complementors, and scale economies.
*   The potential for class breaks is an overriding factor in determining a CSP's market structure. Consequently, CSP architecture, network structure, and monitoring should recognize and reduce the potential for class breaks.
*   The shared security model for the cloud creates weak or weaker links. As technical leadership is being ceded to CSPs by users in terms of the services rendered under IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS, CSPs should as well recognize that they are relied upon for technical leadership in the provision of security. This is particularly the case at the points of interface between CSP and user. Security as a Service (SECaaS) is a poor substitute because it introduces another layer of communication to cloud services. Security is not ancillary to the cloud, it is part-and-parcel of a CSP's operations.

In terms of future research, no relationship between CSP security and CSP pricing has been investigated. This is intentional, as the characteristics of security have been shown to be a function of users' preferences/utility, which here are quite general in recognition that other attributes, such as (in)direct externalities, are also reflected in a CSP's security strategy. For example, a user's direct externality from a CSP is a function of the number of users of the CSP. At the same time, one must recognize that the number of users of a CSP is not simply an integer, but a function whose value is determined by competing CSPs' pricing strategies on both sides of the market. This is the intertwined nature of two-sided markets.

Such complexity suggests that simulation may be a fruitful tactic for analyzing the interrelation between CSP security, pricing, and other CSP attributes. For example, Sun and Tse (2007) present a simulation of the evolution of platform coexistence that is primarily focused on the interaction between pricing policies and the degree of multi-homing on either side of the market. Another interesting extension is to endogenize the actions of hackers within the present model.

Finally, there is hardly a mention of security in the literature on the economics of platform competition. The focus is instead on pricing under monopoly and the conditions under which one side of the market is subsidized. By contrast, this study shows that security is decisive in determining CSP market structure. As the analysis here can be extended to address other forms of IT platform competition, such as operating systems and microchip architecture - both of which have had their own examples of class breaks - the implications of this study are widespread.
