# The Role of Peer Events in Corporate Governance: Evidence from Data Breaches

**Musaib Ashraf**

Michigan State University

---

## ABSTRACT

Economic theory suggests that negative peer events can result in market-wide spillovers that help unaffected firms take real actions to enhance corporate governance. Motivated by the SEC's concern about cybersecurity, I study the role of peer events in corporate governance using the setting of data breaches. While controlling for firm-specific time-varying unobservable characteristics, I find that peer data breaches are associated with a reduction in future internal control material weaknesses for non-breached firms. The association is robust to a changes analysis and varies cross-sectionally with breach, firm, and board characteristics. Inferences remain consistent when studying IT-related material weaknesses only. Finally, non-breached firms are more likely to have a cybersecurity expert on the top management team after a peer breach. My findings have important implications for mandatory disclosure regulation in general and, in particular, suggest that regulators can help reduce market-wide exposure to cyber risk by facilitating disclosure of cyber incidents.

**Data Availability:** All data used in the study are publicly available.

**JEL Classifications:** G34; M15.

**Keywords:** peer events; corporate governance; internal controls; information technology; cybersecurity; information spillover; data breaches.

---

## I. INTRODUCTION

Firms in the same industry share similar operational environments, and economic theory suggests that negative peer events can result in market-wide spillovers that induce unaffected firms to take real actions to enhance corporate governance (e.g., Leuz and Wysocki 2016)—or a "deterrent" role of peer events. Given that market-wide improvements in governance can be economically meaningful even when individual firm-level effects are small, understanding governance-related spillovers is of first-order importance. Studying these spillovers also has critical implications for mandatory disclosure regulation: if the disclosure of negative peer events has a deterrent effect for unaffected firms, then that provides important "economic justification of disclosure and reporting mandates" (Leuz and Wysocki 2016, 554). To that end, I examine the role of peer events in corporate governance using the setting of data breaches. Specifically, I study whether data breach incidents at peer firms induce non-breached firms (i.e., firms that do not experience a breach) to take real actions to enhance corporate governance, as proxied by internal control material weaknesses (U. Hoitash, R. Hoitash, and Bedard 2009).

I focus on the peer data breaches setting because, in addition to enabling me to study an important economic question, cybersecurity is a significant risk for firms. Cyber risks “pose grave threats to investors [and] our capital markets" (Securities and Exchange Commission [SEC] 2018a, 1) and are one of the top concerns for investors (PricewaterhouseCoopers [PwC] 2018). Despite the importance of cyber risk, the governance implications for the risk are not yet fully understood (Rajgopal and Srinivasan 2016) and there is some concern that, with the growing inevitability of being breached, firms may focus on managing the consequences after they are breached rather than proactively managing cyber risk (e.g., Sonnemaker 2019). Given that the exposure to cyber risk is correlated between firms in an industry (e.g., Ettredge and Richardson 2003; IBM 2017), peer data breaches are plausibly exogenous indicators of non-breached firms' exposure to cyber risk (conditional on empirically mitigating the “reflection problem” that is common to peer effect studies). Consequently, the peer breaches setting offers a unique opportunity to evaluate whether firms do indeed take real actions to mitigate exposure to cyber risk.

The peer data breaches setting is further attractive because I can observe both peer data breaches and internal control material weaknesses within a firm-year. Within-firm-year variation enables me to analyze the effect of peer events on unaffected firms' corporate governance while controlling for time-invariant and time-varying unobservable characteristics that are specific to the firm, through the use of firm-year fixed effects (i.e., fixed effects for every firm-year rather than separate fixed effects for every firm and for every year) (Gormley and Matsa 2014). Although my identification strategy does not completely eliminate endogeneity concerns, it significantly mitigates them, especially concerns about the reflection problem.

To analyze the impact of peer data breaches on the internal controls of non-breached firms, I use data from the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse (PRC). The PRC is a non-profit organization that has tracked data breaches since 2005. I use the PRC's data to calculate my test variable PEER_BREACH (a binary indicator for whether firm i's industry peers exhibit a data breach in quarter t-1), and I restrict my sample exclusively to non-breached firms in order to study governance spillovers.

In my main analysis, I find that PEER_BREACH is significantly negatively associated with MATERIAL_WEAKNESS (a binary indicator for whether firm i exhibits an internal control material weakness in quarter t). The result is consistent in a levels analysis with firm-year fixed effects, as well as in a changes analysis. The result is also robust to restricting my test variable to breaches at industry leaders only (Brown, Tian, and Tucker 2018).

I reinforce my main finding with four cross-sectional tests. First, the effect is stronger (i.e., statistically more negative) when the peer breach is a stronger signal of cyber risk, as proxied by the breached firm's catastrophic stock price reaction to the breach and whether the peer breach is a "hack" by an outside party. Second, the effect is stronger when a non-breached firm has existing governance problems, as proxied by an existing material weakness or receiving a going concern opinion. Third, the effect is stronger for firms that possess complementary corporate governance mechanisms, as proxied by a more independent board and having an information security expert on the board. Finally, the external auditor does not appear to drive the effect.

Taken together, these results suggest that peer events play a crucial role in strengthening the corporate governance at unaffected firms. On average, a peer breach is associated with a 6.6 percent reduction in the incidence rate of material weaknesses for non-breached firms. The effect is economically stronger depending on breach, firm, and board characteristics: effect size ranges up to 40.9 percent in cross-sectional analyses.

One potential concern with the inferences drawn from my main analysis is whether internal controls have indeed improved or whether managers withhold the reporting of material weaknesses in fear of being targeted in a cyberattack. To address this concern, I employ a falsification test that reinforces my inferences. I also partition material weaknesses into IT-related and not-IT-related and find that the negative relation holds for both types of material weaknesses, albeit the latter is economically weaker.

Finally, to ensure that my findings are robust to different measures of cyber risk-related governance, I study the association between PEER_BREACH and CYBER_EXPERT (a binary indicator for whether firm i has a cybersecurity expert on the top management team in quarter t), an alternative measure of enhanced governance. I find that PEER_BREACH is significantly positively associated with CYBER_EXPERT. This result supports my inferences that non-breached firms enhance governance over cyber risk after a peer breach.

Overall, my study makes several important contributions. I provide empirical evidence that negative peer events generate information spillovers that help unaffected firms take real actions to enhance corporate governance. Given that modern capital markets depend on strong corporate governance (Armstrong, Guay, and Weber 2010), understanding the role of peer events in shaping market-wide governance is of critical importance (Leuz and Wysocki 2016). Yet, while extant literature has extensively studied capital markets implications of peer events (e.g., Gleason, Jenkins, and Johnson 2008), whether firms enhance corporate governance after a negative peer event (i.e., a deterrent effect) is an open question. In particular, peer events are diverse and complex, and spillover effects may vary greatly depending on the event. For example, while it may be relatively easy for a firm to increase risk factor disclosures in response to a peer's SEC comment letter (Brown et al. 2018), it is unclear whether firms make broad and costly changes to corporate governance, such as strengthening internal controls and enhancing the top management team, in response to negative peer events. In fact, Kedia, Koh, and Rajgopal (2015) suggest that firms begin earnings management after a peer firm discloses a restatement, contrary to the notion of a deterrent effect that leads to improvements in governance.

My findings are further distinct from existing literature because the takeaways for stakeholders are vastly different when a deterrent effect arises through market mechanisms, such as public disclosure that a firm incurred a breach, compared to a deterrent effect that requires enforcement by a regulator, such as an SEC comment letter (Brown et al. 2018). Likewise, firms responding to an enforcement action at a peer does not imply that firms will also respond to other types of negative peer events. My evidence is particularly important considering that the collective magnitude of a market-wide improvement in governance can be economically meaningful.

Next, my analyses have implications for disclosure regulation. As my evidence suggests, disclosures of negative peer events drive beneficial market-wide governance externalities. The existence of these positive spillovers strengthens the economic justification for mandatory disclosure and facilitates a better calibration of the costs and benefits of disclosure regulation (Leuz and Wysocki 2016). If the social value of market-wide externalities outweighs private disclosure costs for affected firms, then the market is "better off" with regulation that mandates affected firms to make costly disclosures. My inferences are notably relevant in the cybersecurity setting, as regulators grapple with how best to mitigate the growing cyber risks faced by firms (e.g., SEC 2018a). My evidence suggests that one way regulators can help reduce market-wide exposure to cyber risk is by facilitating firms' disclosures of cyber incidents.

Finally, my findings expand our understanding of the corporate governance implications of cyber risk in general and peer data breaches in particular. Rajgopal and Srinivasan (2016) question whether boards take cyber risks seriously, and prior evidence is unclear (Lawrence, Minutti-Meza, and Vyas 2018; Richardson, Smith, and Watson 2019). Using peer breaches as a proxy of non-breached firms' exposure to cyber risk, my study suggests that boards do take cyber risk seriously and take steps to mitigate exposure to the risk (as proxied by enhanced internal controls and top management team). These findings also speak to the concern that firms may view data breaches as inevitable and opt to manage the consequences after being breached rather than take steps to proactively prevent breaches (e.g., Gordon, Loeb, Lucyshyn, and Zhou 2015; Sonnemaker 2019; Frolov 2019). Given that cyber incidents are a growing economy-wide risk, my study offers timely and relevant evidence that should be of interest to academics and non-academics alike.

---

## II. INTERNAL CONTROLS, RELATED LITERATURE, AND HYPOTHESIS DEVELOPMENT

### Internal Controls as Proxy of Corporate Governance

In this study, I focus on internal controls as my main proxy of corporate governance because, conceptually, material weaknesses are a strong signal of governance quality. Corporate governance is a set of mechanisms that “help align the actions and choices of managers with the interests of shareholders" (Armstrong et al. 2010, 181). This includes mechanisms that prevent the misuse of capital, as well as mechanisms that ensure timely and accurate financial reports, since accounting information is the primary means by which investors monitor the use of their capital (Sloan 2001; Beyer, Cohen, Lys, and Walther 2010). Within the just-discussed framework, material weaknesses are a strong indicator of governance quality because internal controls help not only prevent misappropriation of assets, but are also critical to generating the timely and accurate financial reports that investors depend on (Dechow, Ge, and Schrand 2010; Rice and Weber 2012). It should come as no surprise, then, that effective internal controls facilitate one of the primary goals of corporate governance: mitigating the agency problems that arise from separation of ownership and control (e.g., Hoitash et al. 2009; R. Hoitash, U. Hoitash, and Johnstone 2012; Cheng, Dhaliwal, and Zhang 2013).

Further, there is a strong conceptual link between cybersecurity and internal controls. Both cybersecurity and internal controls significantly rely on related information technology (IT) platforms (Lawrence et al. 2018; Richardson et al. 2019; Ashraf et al. 2020). Both cybersecurity and internal controls are also sensitive to “human vulnerabilities” or the idea that failures in cybersecurity or internal controls may be a result of human error (Public Company Accounting Oversight Board [PCAOB] 2007; IBM 2014; SEC 2018b). The SEC (2018b, 2) supports the perspective that cybersecurity and internal controls are intertwined, noting that "having sufficient internal accounting controls plays an important role in an issuer's risk management approach to cyber-related threats” and counseling public firms to “consider cyber threats when implementing internal accounting controls" since investors rely on firms to address cyber threats with these controls (SEC 2018c, 1). Consistent with this notion, Deloitte (2015, 23) argues that “the pervasiveness of cyber issues increasingly affects financial information concerns and internal controls." Given the strong conceptual links between cybersecurity and internal controls and between internal controls and governance quality, using internal control material weaknesses as a proxy of corporate governance is appropriate for my setting.

### Peer Effects Related Literature

Extant literature on peer effects in accounting and finance can generally be categorized into two groups: work that studies capital markets implications, and other work that studies real effects. Focusing on the latter, real effects studies generally analyze either a "contagion" effect or a "deterrent" effect. A contagion effect is when a firm behaves similar to its peers. A deterrent effect is when a peer event generates information spillovers that induce unaffected firms to take steps that help the firms avoid, rather than copy, the actions of their peers.

Ample evidence supports the existence of contagion effects. For example, Chiu, Teoh, and Tian (2013) and Omer, Shelley, and Tice (2020) suggest that board interlocks serve as a conduit for the transmission of organizational practices among firms; Beatty, Liao, and Yu (2013) argue that firms make suboptimal investments when peers' earnings are overstated because a firm's investment policy is relative to its peers; Leary and Roberts (2014) show that corporate financial policy is set by firms in response to their peers' financial policies; and Kedia et al. (2015) provide evidence that the average firm begins earnings management after a peer firm announces a restatement.

At the same time, extant evidence on deterrent effects is sparse in general, and whether negative peer events induce unaffected firms to make broad and costly improvements to corporate governance is an open question in particular. For example, Brown et al. (2018) find that firms enhance their risk factor disclosures when peer firms receive an SEC comment letter about risk factors. However, as noted previously, peer events are diverse and complex; spillover effects likely vary depending on the peer event and its source (e.g., regulatory inquiry or peer disclosure). While firms may take relatively low-cost actions (such as modifying risk factor disclosures) in response to SEC enforcement at a peer (Brown et al. 2018), it is unclear whether a non-enforcement negative peer event (such as a peer data breach) serves as a deterrent and encourages unaffected firms to make broad and costly improvements to corporate governance (such as strengthening internal controls).

### Data Breaches Related Literature

Several prior and concurrent studies examine the impact of data breaches for breached firms, and there is some debate regarding how the market responds to breaches. On one hand, several studies find that data breaches have costly valuation implications for the average breached firm. For example, Acquisti, Friedman, and Telang (2006), Goel and Shawky (2009), Gatzlaff and McCullough (2010), A. Malhotra and C. Malhotra (2011), Gordon, Loeb, and Zhou (2011), and Amir, Levi, and Livne (2018) find significant negative abnormal returns for breached firms upon disclosure of a breach. Supporting these findings, the Ponemon Institute (2017a) reports an on-average 5 percent negative return for breached firms after a breach is disclosed. On the other hand, Richardson et al. (2019) argue that while data breaches can cause catastrophic losses in extreme cases, market reaction to the average breached firm is statistically negative, but economically limited.

Beyond firm value implications, the Ponemon Institute (2017b) finds that breached firms incur an average total cost of $225 per record leaked in a breach, such as the costs of forgone business opportunities and customer turnover. Similarly, Janakiraman, Lim, and Rishika (2018) examine customer-level transaction data at a multichannel retailer and find that after a data breach, impacted customers either completely stop shopping at the retailer or decrease the amount of business they do with the firm, leading to an average 33 percent decrease in purchases. Likewise, Cisco (2017) reports that 38 percent of breached firms have lost 20 percent or more of their revenue. Further, other studies find that after a data breach, breached firms exhibit an increase in the cost of private debt, an increase in future restatements and SEC comment letters, an increase in audit fees, greater CEO turnover, and a decrease in sales growth (Sheneman 2017; Lawrence et al. 2018; Lending, Minnick, and Schorno 2018; Smith, Higgs, and Pinsker 2019; Kamiya, Kang, Kim, Milidonis, and Stulz 2021). While firm valuation implications are debatable, prior and concurrent studies collectively provide evidence of negative non-valuation consequences of data breaches for breached firms. In addition, there are valid conceptual reasons why breached firms can experience material negative consequences, as suggested by several studies, but Richardson et al. (2019) still find no material impact on firm value for the average breached firm.

At the same time, there are conflicting findings in the literature regarding data breaches and internal controls, specifically. Lawrence et al. (2018) find that breached firms who experience a breach are more likely to have a future material weakness in internal controls. In contrast, Richardson et al. (2019) find no significant association in a similar setting. While extant literature focuses on the association of data breaches and internal controls for breached firms, I examine the real actions of non-breached firms after a peer data breach. Regardless of whether breaches have a material firm value impact for breached firms, on average, breaches can have catastrophic firm value consequences for breached firms in extreme cases (Richardson et al. 2019). Consequently, if peer data breaches shine a light on the risk that the non-breached firm may also experience a breach and the risk that this breach may turn out to be catastrophic—also known as tail risk (Ashraf and Sunder 2021)—then peer breaches should serve as deterrents and induce non-breached firms to reduce exposure to cyber risk after a peer breach. This notion is supported by Haislip, Kolev, Pinsker, and Steffen (2019), who provide evidence of negative abnormal returns for non-breached firms around the disclosure of a peer breach.

### Hypothesis Development

Firms in the same industry share similar institutional and economic environments, and theory asserts that disclosure about one firm may contain information that is relevant to peers (e.g., Dye 1990; Admati and Pfleiderer 2000; Dye and Hughes 2018; Gao and Zhang 2019). In particular, negative peer events may lead to information spillovers that, conceptually, help unaffected firms take real actions to enhance governance (e.g., Leuz and Wysocki 2016). Related to my setting, I argue that peer data breaches are a signal of non-breached firms' exposure to actual or perceived cyber risk. Actual cyber risk is when a peer breach leads to an information spillover wherein the managers, boards, and shareholders of non-breached firms are now aware of new vulnerabilities that they did not know about previously. Perceived cyber risk is when a peer breach highlights—to a non-breached firm's board and shareholders—the cybersecurity risks that already exist at the non-breached firm, but which may have hitherto been ignored or withheld by management.

In both scenarios, boards and shareholders receive new information about non-breached firms' cyber risk. Either stakeholder can use this new information to mitigate non-breached firms' exposure to cyber risk vis-à-vis oversight over management (Leuz and Wysocki 2016). For example, equipped with new information about cyber risk, a board can ask more informed and pointed questions of management, force management to deploy the necessary resources to resolve outstanding concerns, critically evaluate management's remediation plans, and if necessary—employ disciplining mechanisms when management is noncompliant (Ashraf et al. 2020).

At the same time, conceptually, it is not necessary for boards and shareholders to actively engage with management about cyber risk after a peer breach in order to reduce exposure to cyber risk. This is because non-breached firms should have existing mechanisms in place that discipline management in the event of undesirable behavior, and a decrease in information asymmetry between management and the board or shareholders (vis-à-vis new information contained in peer breaches) helps empower those mechanisms. In turn, the increased ability of the board or shareholders to initiate disciplining mechanisms should incentivize management to choose to mitigate exposure to cyber risk—independent of any active oversight by the board or shareholders. For example, Shleifer and Vishny (1989) argue that information asymmetry is used by managers to entrench themselves and weaken the threat of replacement as a disciplining mechanism; any decrease in information asymmetry strengthens existing mechanisms, such as the threat of replacement, that can be deployed to discipline management if necessary.

Given the preceding arguments, I state my hypothesis in its alternative form:

**H:** Peer data breaches are positively associated with enhanced corporate governance at non-breached firms.

As noted previously, my proxy for enhanced corporate governance is internal control material weaknesses. Since material weaknesses are an inverse measure of corporate governance, my hypothesis predicts a negative relation between peer breaches and material weaknesses.

---

## III. RESEARCH DESIGN, DATA, AND SAMPLE SELECTION

### Research Design

I study my research question using the following linear probability model:

MATERIAL_WEAKNESS = Σ β_Firm-Year Fixed Effects + β₁PEER_BREACH + β₂SIZE + β₃SALES_GROWTH + β₄INV + β₅LOSS + β₆Z_SCORE + β₇ANNOUNCE_RESTATEMENT + β₈INST_OWNERSHIP + β₉FOREIGN + β₁₀ACQUISITION + β₁₁RESTRUCTURE + β₁₂Q4 + e

where i indexes firm and t indexes quarters. The main dependent variable in this study is MATERIAL_WEAKNESS, which equals 1 if firm i has a material weakness in SOX 302 internal controls in quarter t (0 otherwise). The independent variable of interest is PEER_BREACH, which equals 1 if any of firm i's industry peers exhibit a data breach during firm i's quarter t-1 (0 otherwise). A negative coefficient on PEER_BREACH would be consistent with non-breached firms taking real actions to improve corporate governance after a peer data breach.

To calculate my test variable, I identify industry peers based on the Hoberg-Phillips text-based network industry classifications (TNIC). TNIC is an industry classification system that categorizes firms as peers if they operate in a similar product space (Hoberg and Phillips 2010, 2016). The advantage of this industry classification over more traditional measures is twofold. First, non-breached firms can only react to peer data breaches if they know about the breaches. It is considerably more likely that a non-breached firm is knowledgeable about events at firms that it shares a product space with rather than by virtue of being in the same SIC. While being in the same SIC arguably is a proxy of being in the same product space, TNIC is a more direct measure of the construct. For example, Hoberg and Phillips (2016) provide evidence that TNIC is able to classify firms as peers that managers themselves consider to be actual rivals. Second, TNIC is a time-varying intransitive industry classification system, which reduces noise in my measure by better identifying competitors as a firm's product space evolves over time.

Importantly, I incorporate firm-year fixed effects in Equation (1), which help mitigate endogeneity concerns by removing between-firm-year variation. Firm-year fixed effects particularly help address the reflection problem that is common to all peer effect studies. In short, firms self-select into their industries and industry peers share institutional and economic environments, which leads to the concern that any peer-based measure may proxy for an industry-driven omitted latent factor that is simultaneously correlated with my test and dependent variables (Manski 1993; Leary and Roberts 2014). By allowing me to compare within-firm-year variation, firm-year fixed effects strongly address concerns about self-selection, as well as concerns about correlated omitted time-invariant and time-varying firm characteristics (which, also, naturally controls for industry-level unobservable characteristics).

While firm-year fixed effects go a long way in addressing the reflection problem, there remains the possibility that PEER_BREACH is correlated with industry-driven within-firm-year characteristics of the firm, and these characteristics, rather than peer data breaches, account for my treatment effect. To mitigate this concern, I control for a vector of firm-quarter characteristics that extant studies have shown to be correlated with the effectiveness of a firm's internal controls. Following Ashbaugh-Skaife, Collins, and Kinney (2007) and Doyle, Ge, and McVay (2007), I control for the following variables in my regression model: SIZE, SALES_GROWTH, INV, LOSS, Z_SCORE, ANNOUNCE_RESTATEMENT, INST_OWNERSHIP, FOREIGN, ACQUISITION, and RESTRUCTURE. I also control for Q4, an indicator variable that equals 1 if quarter t is the fourth quarter for firm i's fiscal year, because auditors perform an audit of internal controls at the end of the fiscal year. All of these firm-quarter variables are defined in detail in Appendix A.

### Data and Sample Selection

Table 1, Panel A presents my sample of data breach incidents. I collect data breach incidents from the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse (PRC), which has tracked publicly known data breaches since 2005. PRC's database includes data breaches "reported through either government agencies or verifiable media sources" (Privacy Rights Clearinghouse 2017), and PRC focuses on breaches that result in leakage of people's personal information, most often customer records. For every data breach observation, PRC provides the name of the breached firm and the date the breach is first publicly known, which I use to construct my sample of data breaches that occur at public firms.

I begin with 7,841 data breach incidents available on PRC between January 2005 and December 2017. I exclude 1,681 incidents where the breached firm is a government, not-for-profit organization, or private school or university. Next, I manually match data breach incidents to firm-quarter observations on Compustat, which leads to the deletion of 4,876 data breach incidents that occurred at private firms (or firms not on Compustat) and results in a final sample of 1,284 data breaches that occurred at public U.S. breached firms between 2005 and 2017. Of these breaches, 349 are caused by a hack, 412 are caused by an insider (e.g., employee), 443 are caused by loss of physical device, and 80 are in none of these categories. I use the 1,284 observations to calculate my test variable PEER_BREACH for non-breached firms.

Table 1, Panel B presents my sample selection for subsequent multivariate regression analyses. I begin with 438,314 firm-quarter observations in Compustat with non-missing CIKs and eliminate 26,249 observations that belong to firms that exhibit a data breach at any point in my sample (i.e., I restrict my analysis exclusively to non-breached firms). I also exclude 191,444 firm-quarters with missing data on SOX 302 internal control material weaknesses or that do not possess at least one peer per TNIC. Finally, I delete 68,405 observations with missing data to calculate required control variables, resulting in a final sample of 152,216 non-breached firm-quarter observations.

---

## IV. RESULTS

### Descriptive Statistics and Pearson Correlations

Table 2, Panels A and B present the descriptive statistics for my internal controls sample. Twenty-seven percent of observations exhibit a peer data breach in the prior quarter, while 7 percent of observations in my sample exhibit an internal control material weakness, which is consistent with extant literature (e.g., Ashraf et al. 2020). All other control variables are also generally consistent with extant literature (e.g., Ashbaugh-Skaife et al. 2007; Doyle et al. 2007; Ashraf et al. 2020).

Further, in my sample of data breach incidents, there is an average (median) of 22 (24) breach incidents per quarter and an average (median) of 69 (39) non-breached peers per breach incident.

I plot my test variable PEER_BREACH by industry in Figure 1. Consistent with IBM (2017), PEER_BREACH is above the sample mean for technology, telecom, wholesale and retail, healthcare, and finance firms. Importantly, the use of firm-year fixed effects in my analyses mitigates any impact that industry-level characteristics may have on my inferences.

One concern with my main test variable PEER_BREACH is that non-breached firms may not be knowledgeable about breaches at all of their peers. Using TNIC as my industry classification is intended to mitigate this concern because, as already discussed, firms are more likely to be knowledgeable of an event if it occurs at a peer with whom a firm shares a product market. Following Brown et al. (2018), I further mitigate this concern with a supplementary test variable that focuses on peer breaches that occur at industry leaders. PEER_BREACH_LEADER is calculated the same as PEER_BREACH except it equals 1 only when there is a breach at a peer industry leader, where an industry leader is a firm that has 20 percent or more of the industry's total yearly sales (Brown et al. 2018). One percent of observations in my sample have a peer industry leader that exhibits a breach in quarter t-1.

Table 3 presents the Pearson correlations for my internal controls sample. PEER_BREACH is significantly negatively (p-value ≤ 0.01) correlated with MATERIAL_WEAKNESS. This is univariate evidence consistent with the notion that peer events assist unaffected firms to improve corporate governance. I explore the relation between peer breaches and internal controls further in subsequent multivariate analyses.

### Main Internal Control Analyses

I present the results of my main analysis in Panel A of Table 4. Across the first three columns of Panel A, the coefficient on PEER_BREACH is negative and significant (p-values < 0.01). Based on Column (3), the economic significance of experiencing a peer data breach is a reduction in the incidence rate of material weaknesses by 6.6 percent (relative to the sample mean). The coefficient on PEER_BREACH_LEADER in Column (4) is also significantly negative (p-value < 0.05), and the economic significance of a peer industry leader being breached is relatively larger than a breach at any peer firm: a 12.6 decrease in material weaknesses, relative to the sample mean. Results are consistent when, instead of firm-year fixed effects, I conduct a changes analysis in Panel B (p-values < 0.05 or lower). Overall, the results of Table 4 suggest that peer events have positive governance externalities for unaffected firms.

### Cross-Sectional Internal Control Analyses

I reinforce my inferences with four cross-sectional analyses. The theory of why a peer event may impact the corporate governance of unaffected firms is based on the notion of information transfers between peers (Leuz and Wysocki 2016)—or the idea that a peer event provides unaffected firms with new information that can be used to help mitigate governance problems. Consequently, I first study if my main effect is stronger when the peer breach is a stronger signal of cyber risk (i.e., has greater information spillovers). I proxy for this construct with the variables PEER_BREACH_CATASTROPHIC and PEER_BREACH_HACKED.

PEER_BREACH_CATASTROPHIC is a binary indicator that loads as a 1 when any of firm i's industry peers exhibit a catastrophic data breach during firm i's quarter t−1, where a catastrophic breach is when the breached firm experiences a 10 percent or larger negative cumulative abnormal return in the [-1, 1] window around breach disclosure date. This variable is based on the argument that when the breached firm experiences a catastrophic negative impact on firm value, then that breach is a stronger signal of a vulnerability that non-breached firms may also be exposed to.

PEER_BREACH_HACKED is a binary indicator that loads as a 1 when any of firm i's industry peers exhibit a data breach during firm i's quarter t-1 that is a result of a hack by an outside party. Because operating and institutional environments (such as policies, procedures, information systems, network of customers and supplies, etc.) are similar among peer firms, conceptually, all types of peer breaches contain some information about vulnerabilities that non-breached firms may also be exposed to. However, relative to vulnerabilities that require physical or insider access in order to be exploited, remote outsiders can just as easily target a vulnerability at a non-breached firm as they did at the breached firm. Thus, the risk of being breached should be relatively higher for non-breached firms when the peer breach is a hacking event relative to other types of peer breaches.

The results of both analyses are presented in Table 5. Consistent with expectations, the coefficient on the interactions in both columns is significantly negative and the “total effect” is, as well (p-values ≤ 0.10 or lower). Importantly, the economic impact of a peer breach being catastrophic or being a hack is larger than the on-average effect in Table 4—a 15.4 and 10.7 percent decrease, respectively, in the incidence of a material weakness relative to the sample mean.

As my second cross-sectional analysis, I study the incremental effect of peer breaches for non-breached firms that have existing governance problems, which I proxy for with MATERIAL_WEAKNESS and GOING_CONCERN (binary indicator that equals 1 if firm i's audit report for quarter t–1’s fiscal year indicates a going concern opinion). The intuition behind this analysis is noted in Section II. If management has hitherto downplayed existing problems at the firm, then the new information that peer breaches provide the board and shareholders should enable either stakeholder to better question or push back on management's assertions (e.g., significance of existing problems or remediation plans). Conceptually, both MATERIAL_WEAKNESS and GOING_CONCERN proxy for existing problems and, therefore, peer breaches should have a stronger effect for these non-breached firms. The results of these analyses are presented in Table 6 and are consistent with expectations (p-values ≤ 0.05 or lower). The economic significance of a peer breach for observations with existing problems is a 40.9 and 35.3 percent reduction in material weaknesses (relative to sample mean), respectively.

I next study whether my main effect varies for non-breached firms that possess complementary governance mechanisms, using two proxies: BOARD_INDEPENDENCE (binary indicator that equals 1 if firm i's number of independent directors scaled by total number of directors is in the top quartile in quarter t-1) and BOARD_CYBER_EXPERT (a binary indicator for whether a director on firm i's board in quarter t-1 has professional work experience as a Chief Information Officer, Chief Information Security Officer, or Chief Security Officer). The former is a proxy of board monitoring, as the literature provides evidence that independent directors tend to provide more oversight than non-independent directors (Armstrong et al. 2010). The latter is a proxy for the board's level of expertise related to cybersecurity—expertise that better enables the board to advise management. Both are proxies of complementary corporate governance mechanisms and, conceptually, new information that arises from a peer breach should be more effectively utilized by more independent boards and boards with more relevant expertise.

The results of these analyses are presented in Table 7. Consistent with expectations, the negative relation between PEER_BREACH and MATERIAL_WEAKNESS is stronger when the board is more independent (p-value < 0.05). Similarly, a non-breached firm whose board possesses a cyber expert exhibits a stronger improvement in internal controls relative to firms with boards that do not possess this expertise (p-value < 0.10). The economic significance of a peer breach is an 11.0 percent and 16.0 percent decrease in material weaknesses (relative to the sample mean) for non-breached firms that possess either a more independent board or a cyber expert on the board, respectively.

For my final cross-sectional analysis, I study whether it is, in fact, the external auditor that drives my treatment effect. External auditors focus on auditing SOX 404 internal controls at the end of the year for accelerated filers; they do not audit SOX 302 controls (PCAOB 2007). However, auditors do perform quarterly reviews of financial statements (Krishnan and Zhang 2005). Thus, it is possible that auditors perceive a peer breach as an increase in risk for non-breached firms and, therefore, encourage the non-breached firms to address the risk. Further, given the inherent connection between SOX 302 and SOX 404 internal controls, it is possible that auditors may indirectly account for my treatment effect: non-breached firms who expect a SOX 404 audit at the end of the year may address the issue more strongly during the year to prevent any issues from cropping up during the SOX 404 audit. Consequently, I study whether my treatment effect is stronger for non-breached firms audited by industry expert auditors (INDUSTRY_EXPERT_AUDITOR, which is a binary indicator for whether firm i's external auditor for quarter t-1's fiscal year is an industry expert) or non-breached firms that are accelerated filers (ACCELERATED_FILER, which is a binary indicator for whether firm i is an accelerated filer for quarter t-1's fiscal year).

Beyond being considered by the literature to be higher-quality auditors (e.g., Reichelt and Wang 2010), industry-expert auditors are arguably better equipped than other auditors to assess the risk signal of a peer breach and, therefore, to encourage non-breached firms to address that risk. Further, accelerated filers are the firms that must obtain a SOX 404 audit at the end of the year. If the effect of peer breaches is really driven by the external auditor (directly or indirectly), then my treatment effect should be partially or fully subsumed by these variables. The results of these analyses are presented in Table 8, where the coefficient on the interaction term in both columns is insignificant (p-values = 0.42 and 0.55). These insignificant results suggest there is no evidence to support the notion that my treatment effect varies between these two characteristics. Thus, external auditors are unlikely to drive my treatment effect.

### Falsification Test and IT Material Weaknesses

Publicly observable internal control material weaknesses are a function of both the presence and the reporting of a material weakness. Consequently, one potential concern regarding my main analysis is the possibility that managers are not actually improving internal controls, but rather choosing not to publicly report material weaknesses. While this is unlikely, given that the CEO and CFO are personally liable for any misreporting in the post-SOX era (i.e., the cost-benefit trade-off for managers to withhold the reporting of a material weakness is in favor of reporting), it is possible—especially because disclosing a material weakness could actually make non-breached firms a target for malicious third parties.

To address this concern, I conduct a falsification analysis by studying the effect of PEER_BREACH on MATERIAL_WEAKNESS in a subsample of observations that subsequently restate their financial statements. Because misstatements generally have an associated underlying failure in internal controls (e.g., Rice and Weber 2012), each observation in this sample likely possesses an internal control material weakness; however, not all of these observations necessarily report that weakness prior to restating their financial statements. If the negative relation between PEER_BREACH and MATERIAL_WEAKNESS in my main analysis is really just managers withholding the disclosure of material weaknesses, then that relation should be negative and significant in this subsample, as well. However, as shown in Table 9, there is no significant association between PEER_BREACH and MATERIAL_WEAKNESS in this analysis (p-value = 0.93), which supports the notion that firms are actually improving internal controls after a peer data breach rather than just not publicly reporting them.

I further probe my main inferences by bifurcating material weaknesses into IT-related material weaknesses and non-IT-related material weaknesses. This analysis helps to pin down whether non-breached firms are improving IT and cybersecurity only or if they are improving the control environment as a whole. If non-breached firms improve cybersecurity specifically after a peer breach, then that should manifest as an improvement in IT-related internal controls because the two share common IT platforms (e.g., Lawrence et al. 2018). If peer breaches shine a light on the internal control environment in general rather than just cybersecurity in particular, then that should manifest as an improvement in internal controls that are not directly related to IT or cybersecurity. For instance, the National Institute of Standards and Technology Cybersecurity Framework requires firms to obtain a deep understanding of their business, governance, and control environment in order to develop effective cyber protection strategies. A byproduct of this process is enhanced knowledge, and potential improvement, of a firm's overall internal control environment.

Conceptually, if peer breaches contain information about non-breached firms' exposure to cyber risk, then, at the very least, IT material weaknesses should be improved. In contrast, it remains an open question whether non-IT material weaknesses are improved, as well. Non-breached firms may focus only on improving cybersecurity, in which case there may not be a decrease in non-IT material weaknesses. Alternatively, if peer breaches draw non-breached firms' attention to the control environment as a whole, then there may be a reduction in non-IT material weaknesses, as well.

The results of this analysis are presented in Table 10. Not surprisingly, there is a negative and significant relation between PEER_BREACH and IT material weaknesses in Column (1) (p-value ≤ 0.01). Interestingly, there is also a negative and significant relation between PEER_BREACH and non-IT material weaknesses in Column (2) (p-value < 0.10). Altogether, this evidence supports the notion that peer breaches contain information spillovers that are relevant to non-breached firms' exposure to cyber risk, and the evidence supports the notion that peer breaches draw non-breached firms' attention to the whole control environment rather than just cybersecurity.

### Cyber Expertise on Top Management Team

The focus of this study is on material weaknesses as a proxy for corporate governance. While there are strong conceptual reasons why I choose to study material weaknesses (see discussion in Section II), there are also downsides to this proxy (see Dechow et al. 2010). Consequently, to ensure my inferences are robust to my research design choice, as my final analysis, I study the effect of peer breaches on a different proxy: having a cyber expert on the top management team, where CYBER_EXPERT equals 1 when firm i has a Chief Information Officer, Chief Information Security Officer, or Chief Security Officer on the top management team in quarter t (0 otherwise). The results of this analysis are presented in Table 11. The positive and significant coefficient on PEER_BREACH (p-value < 0.05) suggests that non-breached firms are more likely to have a cyber expert on the top management team after a peer breach, which is another indicator of enhanced oversight over cyber risk.

---

## V. CONCLUSION

In this study, I examine the role of peer events in corporate governance, using peer data breaches and internal controls as my empirical setting. I find that peer data breaches are associated with a lower incidence rate of future internal control material weaknesses for non-breached firms, suggesting that peer events have market-wide spillovers that help enhance corporate governance at unaffected firms. The finding is consistent in a levels analysis with firm-year fixed effects and in a changes analysis; the effect varies cross-sectionally with breach, firm, and board characteristics, but not with auditor characteristics; and the effect is likely not attributable to managers withholding the public reporting of a material weakness. The evidence further suggests that peer data breaches are associated with an improvement in both information technology-related and unrelated internal controls, implying that information spillovers from peer events can have broad implications for corporate governance. Finally, my inferences are robust to using the presence of a cyber expert on the top management team as a proxy of governance instead of internal controls.

As a whole, my findings should be of interest to both academics and non-academics, including regulators, boards, and shareholders. Given that strong governance is critical to the functioning of modern capital markets, understanding the deterrent role peer events play in shaping market-wide corporate governance is of first-order importance. Likewise, identifying positive market-wide governance externalities of negative disclosures provides one economic justification for mandatory disclosure requirements (Leuz and Wysocki 2016).

Finally, my evidence suggests that firms do enhance corporate governance in response to cybersecurity concerns and boards do take cyber risks seriously, which has implications not only for regulators who are concerned about firms' ability to manage cyber risk (e.g., SEC 2018a), but also for shareholders who have strong incentives to mitigate exposure to this risk (e.g., PwC 2018). Importantly, my analysis speaks to the concern that firms may opt to just manage the consequences of a breach after the fact rather than proactively strengthen cybersecurity (e.g., Gordon et al. 2018). My findings are particularly relevant given that cybersecurity is a relatively new and growing risk faced by firms. As noted by the Depository Trust and Clearing Corporation (2018, 16), cyber risks “may have become the most important near-term threat to financial stability [of the economy]."
