# Digital "x"—Charting a Path for Digital-Themed Research

## Journal Information
**Journal**: Information Systems Research  
**Volume**: 34, No. 2, June 2023, pp. 463–486  
**ISSN**: 1047-7047 (print), 1526-5536 (online)  
**DOI**: https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2022.1186  
**Copyright**: © 2023 The Author(s)  
**Open Access Statement**: This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. You are free to copy, distribute, transmit, and adapt this work, but you must attribute this work as “Information Systems Research. Copyright © 2023 The Author(s), https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2022.1186, used under a Creative Commons Attribution License: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.”  
**Supplemental Material**: The e-companion is available at https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2022.1186.

## Authors
- **Abayomi Baiyere** (Corresponding author)  
  - Digitalization Department, Copenhagen Business School, 2000 Frederiksberg, Denmark  
  - Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6, Canada  
  - Contact: aba.digi@cbs.dk, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2211-4960  
- **Varun Grover**  
  - Walton College of Business, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas 72701  
  - Contact: VGrover@walton.uark.edu  
- **Kalle J. Lyytinen**  
  - Weatherhead School of Management, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106  
  - Contact: kalle@case.edu, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3352-5343  
- **Stephanie Woerner**  
  - Center for Information Systems Research, Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142  
  - Contact: Woerner@mit.edu  
- **Alok Gupta**  
  - Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455  
  - Contact: alok@umn.edu, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2097-1643  

## Submission and Publication Details
- **Received**: May 20, 2020  
- **Revised**: May 30, 2021; April 14, 2022  
- **Accepted**: June 6, 2022  
- **Published Online in Articles in Advance**: February 23, 2023  

## Abstract
As of late, the use of “digital” as a qualifier to established research concepts is increasing. However, we have yet to clearly establish what makes a “digital x” concept distinct from an “IT x” concept when “x” stands for well-established concepts such as strategy, infrastructure, innovation, or transformation, among others. In this paper, we review the need for, and merit of, labeling focal concepts in our field as “digital x” in contrast to using the dominant, incumbent label of “IT x.” We position the shift as a call to attend to new salient features that characterize contemporary settings of information technology use and its effects. Recognizing this need, we develop guidelines for future research by arguing what novel phenomena the label of “digital x” foregrounds and how insights gained through such foregrounding contribute to scholarship in ways that the term “IT x” does not. By doing so, this paper promotes clarity for the use of the digital x concepts and introduces explicit guidelines to delineate between the nascent stream of digital x research and established modes of IT x research. We hope that the essay helps information systems scholars and scholars in neighboring disciplines attending to digital phenomena identify novel research opportunities grounded on sound conceptual foundations that will foster cumulative generation of knowledge around digital x.

**History**: Paul Pavlou served as the Senior Editor and the Associate Editor for this article.

**Keywords**: digital x • IT x • digitalization • digitization • conceptual clarity • information systems (IS) theory • context shifts • guidelines

## 1. Introduction
“Digital,” “digitization,” and “digitalization” have recently emerged with increased frequency as terms used in information systems (IS) research and practice. Their escalating use appears to result in an uncritical renaming of well-established concepts into new formulaic forms of “digital x,” when “x” stands for any past IS research stream’s pivotal categories. Examples abound such as “digital” plus “innovation,” “transformation,” “strategy,” and “infrastructure,” just to name a few (Yoo et al. 2010a, Bharadwaj et al. 2013, Henfridsson and Bygstad 2013, Baiyere et al. 2020a). Indeed, Rodriguez and Piccoli (2018) show that the degree of usage of the term “digital x” over the past 17 years has increased, whereas the opposite trend has occurred in the usage of the information technology (IT) focused “IT x” term. So are we experiencing yet another hype wave of buzzwords (Swanson and Ramiller 1997), or is something deeper going on?

The challenge in answering this question is whether we can surface consequential reasons that enough has changed that we, as a field, are justified in adopting a new label “digital x” for some class of phenomena for which we would have previously reserved the term “IT x.” The new label should convey something essential and novel about this class of phenomena that the “IT x” term fails to capture and, therefore, comes with significant theoretical consequences. Without such justification, it is hard to reach beyond a faddish sale of “old wine in a new bottle” (Yoo et al. 2010a, Baiyere et al. 2017). We call providing such a basis justified or reasoned if there is a context shift and a qualitative difference.

With context shifts, new features, entities, and properties that were neither present, visible, nor salient in the previous context should come to our attention, and the differences should be significant. To be justified, the change of the label needs to convey that the previous ways of accounting for some IT properties and resulting individual, organizational, and societal behaviors and impacts are not adequate anymore; that is, we fail to get into the heart of the matter without making such a shift (Kohli and Grover 2008, Yoo 2012, Bharadwaj et al. 2013, Grover and Lyytinen 2015, Peppard 2018). Davison and Tarafdar (2018) echo this idea with their emphasis on shifting baselines that disciplines need to heed. Parmiggiani et al. (2020, p. 584) frame this as a question for the discipline: “[what] might [digital] mean for the information systems (IS) discipline: would IS groups consume business schools (and perhaps even beyond) or would, conversely, digital become so pervasive that we would not need a standalone IS discipline any longer?”

Thus, attending with new theoretical vigor to digital x comes with a tension: it is an opportunity and a threat for the IS field. When framed as an opportunity, IS discipline is historically well-positioned to champion digital x research given its decades-long history of engaging intimately with digital phenomena. Given the growing use of the “digital” label in neighboring disciplines, we as a field should be well-positioned to recognize and articulate novel theories about the phenomena. This offers the potential to situate the IS field as an intellectual engine for other disciplines and enter into fruitful dialogues with them. This will help alleviate nagging issues raised in past IS identity debates (Benbasat and Zmud 2003, Galliers 2003, King and Lyytinen 2004) and build IS as a pivotal reference discipline in the increasingly broad scope of research on the digital phenomena. Bypassing this opportunity and continuing to confine attention on the safer IT x research spells a missed opportunity for the field.

Digital x research also represents a threat. It constitutes a new “shifting baseline” (Davison and Tarafdar 2018). Such shifting baselines threaten the relevance of the field by fragmenting what constitutes the core of the field’s intellectual capital. These threats can be realized if we, as a community, fail to recognize and engage with the ongoing shift. With the nascent positioning of digital x as a novel topic of significance and interest to scholars beyond IS and traditional IT departments (Berry 2012, Colbert et al. 2016, Dave and Ellis-Chadwick 2019), this topic arguably carries the hallmark of an impending shift. Consequently, the IS discipline can lose its distinctiveness as every discipline in the business school participates in the gold rush to come up with their own flavor of digital x. This is especially so if this takes place without a need to recognize or acknowledge the wealth of accumulated knowledge in the IS field around digital.<sup>1</sup> Under this scenario, deans may start questioning the benefit of having IS departments or groups studying digital innovation, digital strategy, or digital marketing when the school already has innovation, strategy, and marketing departments/groups who also examine digital. There is also the danger that the term “digital” loses its distinctiveness, whereby everything and, thus, nothing is considered digital.

Essentially, this essay calls for carefully unpacking and theorizing what digital signifies, resonating with what Habermas (1984, p. 2003) calls scholarly “rational reconstruction” of empirical phenomena. Central to such efforts is the creation of a lexicon, a shared vocabulary of pivotal concepts: digital x in our case. Such a vocabulary captures the assumptions, operationalizations, interpretations of observations, and logics of inferences around the focal phenomena shared by a scholarly community. The rise of the term “digital” suggests that the field’s lexicon is shifting. This urges us to articulate anew the conceptual nature of digital that differs from IT by refining its ontological status. Getting the foundational element of the lexicon right is critical and urgent if we are to advance novel theoretical contributions to account for the complex, unprecedented ways in which digital now operates in the human enterprise (Habermas 1984, Berente et al. 2019).

For the IS field, the need for a shift in labeling is not new; IT has, through its short history, changed its properties and colors like a chameleon (Yoo 2012). When some of this paper’s authors entered the field, we were focused on electronic data processing and “computers.” We have seen other waves, such as virtual x, cyber x, IS x, electronic-/e-x, to mention a few. The need for the current label shift reflects our constant struggle to come to grips with the field’s essential features as the field continues to advance at an impressive pace in enterprise and society. In this regard, valid and cogent claims for a proper context shifting are central to the salience of the field’s empirical and theoretical discourse so that we do not lose our relevance and we deal with phenomena that matter.

Essentially, context shifting invites new, alternative explanations of the agency of the focal IT, its affordances, and its conditions of use and effects. This calls for fresh accounts of how such uses and effects emerge through the dynamic interactions with embedded social structures within the development and use contexts (Sarker et al. 2019). The relentless infrastructural expansion of IT constantly highlights the need to attend to the emergence of unexpected components, relationships, and social elements demanding new explanations (Yoo et al. 2010a, Bharadwaj et al. 2013, Tumbas et al. 2018, Baiyere et al. 2020a).

The aim of this essay is to identify salient reasons for the recent context shift that are coalescing around the escalating use of digital x. We advocate conceptual clarity—“conceptual clearance”—in how we apply the term “digital” as we move forward. The future use should harness rather than dilute the theoretical and practical value of the new label and the shift it embodies. To be more precise, our objectives are twofold:

1. Given that digital is now extensively used in the extant literature and in popular parlance, our first objective is to trace and highlight the ontological foundations and usage of “digital” as a conceptual label. In doing so, we offer a meta-framing for the different ways of framing the ontological stance of the digital.
2. Many foundational concepts that underlie the use of digital x ultimately draw upon research done in the IS or neighboring disciplines. Therefore, the border between the digital x and the IT x or even x schools of thought remain nuanced and obfuscated. We recognize that exact definitions vary across contexts<sup>2</sup> with different theoretical and empirical consequences. Thus, our second objective is to develop guidelines on how to justify that the use of a “digital x” label conceptually differs from the use of an “IT x” label in a chosen domain.

In line with these goals, we assert that “digital x” serves as a signifier of (a) a context shift and (b) a qualitative difference from IT x. At the same time digital x is not (a) a synonym for IT x, (b) unrelated to IT x, or (c) a totally new conceptual label.

The remainder of the paper advances our argument as follows: In the next section, we address our first goal and review the varied uses of “digital” and its derivatives in the prior work and clarify our conceptualization of the term. This urges us to articulate the ontology of “digital” and to show how the ontology has evolved as IT has advanced. The analysis is followed by a short juxtaposition of the linkages and differences between “digital” and “IT” terms. This helps address our second goal to identify and to illustrate the context-shifting attributes of digital as well as mark the qualitative differences that distinguish digital x from IT x in conjunction with several established “x” categories of the field. This lays a foundation to formulate guidelines for future research on key considerations that help clarify and delineate the uses of a digital x concept in contrast to and instead of common IT x concepts. We conclude by identifying broad themes and foci for future digital x research.

## 2. Ontological Foundations of Digital
The meaning and etymology of “digital,” that is, defining what is digital or, in academic parlance, the ontology of digital forms the necessary premise discussing when the use of the term “digital” is warranted. Therefore, we need to start with a simple question: what do scholars generally mean when they evoke the term “digital”? Whereas several articles in our field have recently offered useful clarifications and arguments in favor of the concept (see, e.g., Tilson et al. 2010, Yoo et al. 2010b, Kallinikos et al. 2013, Ross 2017, Faulkner and Runde 2019, Baskerville et al. 2020, Wessel et al. 2021), there remains still a lot to be clarified in how the “digital” label should be productively used in conjunction with other key categories that define the field’s phenomena. A broad review of the prior uses of the term highlights two separate viewpoints on “digital,” which we refer to as (a) the digitization view, the idea of “digital” arising in the digitizing or technical sense, and (b) the digitalization view, the idea of “digital” arising in the contextual (social, organizational, etc.) sense (Tilson et al. 2010, Ross 2017, Sambamurthy and Zmud 2017). We can trace these two distinct usages back to two paradigms of thought that have coevolved in scholarly and popular parlance around the use of computers and IT: the engineering (or computer science) paradigm and the management (or social science) paradigm.

### 2.1. Digitization
The digitization view of digital starts with and considers the phenomenon primarily as the process and outcome of efficient encoding information in bits as zeros and ones (Goblick and Holsinger 1967). In this view, converting a physical or analog information-carrying object into bitstrings makes the resulting new object digital or digitized by virtue of its acquired state as a discrete, abstract, and mathematic object that can be manipulated, stored, and transmitted independent of its material realization (Brennen and Kreiss 2016). Generally, any meaningful representation of information (such as a bookkeeping entry, transaction, book, record, or film) can be encoded in bits and can then be called a digital object (Faulkner and Runde 2019). The conversion and its prerequisite technical innovations to decode analog representation into digital representation are referred to here as digitization (Smith 1999, Tilson et al. 2010).

This way of treating the digitized/digital object (henceforth digital object) as an abstract engineered artifact with specific technical qualities aligns with an engineering paradigm. Traditionally, the digitization view recognizes the status of abstract, nonmaterial digital objects in the form of bitstrings, which, because of their homogenous nature, can be stored, processed, transferred, and presented in a variety of material bearers and related technologies using a wide range of mathematical (and related material) operations (Faulkner and Runde 2019). As abstract artifacts, digital objects are subject to social processes of editability that sustain their form and variety as digital objects, semiotically expressed in a specific structure of zeros and ones outside any specific physical bearer.

Additionally, the notion of digital under the digitization view denotes not only the nonmaterial bitstrings of zeros and ones, but also the embodying material bearers (Tilson et al. 2010, Ross 2017). As noted by Ross (2017), digital in this sense of digitization—which she refers to as to digitize—also covers the physical computing systems forming the backbone of contemporary organization’s information processing capability. In this view, digital refers to the variety of material technologies and social arrangements surrounding them that embody or enable the storage, manipulation, and transmission of bitstrings in terms of cost, speed reliability, and so on (Ross et al. 2017, Sambamurthy and Zmud 2017, Fürstenau et al. 2019).

### 2.2. Digitalization
The digitalization view draws upon and expands on the digitization view. It shifts the focus from the bitstrings and related material technologies to the applications; processes of embedding; and related organizational, industrial, and societal outcomes of deploying bitstring as socially embedded digital objects in particular (sociotechnical) contexts (Tilson et al. 2010, Bharadwaj et al. 2013, Gray and Rumpe 2015). In the digitalization view, actors pursue specific societal, strategic, organizational, or individual goals, and whereas seeking to satisfy their interests within a given social and economic context, they leverage various material and abstract features of digital objects as meaningful semiotic entities. This digitalization view (Tilson et al. 2010, Brennen and Kreiss 2016, Sambamurthy and Zmud 2017) covers manifold social, organizational, and regulatory processes necessary to engender a shift toward a desired outcome by deploying a select set of digital objects and their operations (Gray and Rumpe 2015, Ross et al. 2017). Broadly speaking, digitalization reaches beyond the digitization view in that it focuses on the ongoing reorganizing and inventing of novel social and technical structures and their elements and relationships that leverage the novel properties of digital objects in pursuit of agents’ goals (Yoo et al. 2010b, Salmela et al. 2022).

Digital, in the sense of digitalization, is viewed as application of digitization to achieve specific, often novel, organizational or societal goals. This is accomplished by agents, who, through digitizing, can bring together and rearrange into new and novel relationships elements of the digitized objects and how they relate to the social and physical worlds. The process aligns the elements across these three worlds in original ways, offering new capacities for accomplishing things. During digitalization, there are prior changes in digital objects and how they consequently shape the social setting. Digitalization not only assumes that material representations of information using digital encoding change (digitization), but the social facets and processes of using of digital objects change and consequently shape the social setting (Hylving and Schultze 2013). Statements such as “we digitalize our process” rather than “we digitize our process” place an emphasis on change in the social and organizational facets of processes that seek to take advantage of outcomes of digitizing. Essentially, digitalization centers scholarly attention on how actors leverage new affordances (what actors can do or have a potential to do in a given setting) enabled by digital objects (Malhotra et al. 2021) and, hence, manifest new forms of agency. This allows actors to do things differently to achieve their goals that hitherto was not possible (Gray and Rumpe 2015).

### 2.3. Relating the Two Ontological Foundations—Coconstitutive Ontology
Figure 1 provides an overview of how the two views are construed in prior literature and also provides a foundation for integrating and reconciling them. The figure depicts how digitization channels scholarly attention to bitstrings and their material bearers whenever the “digital” label is being evoked. This view is consistent with Faulkner and Runde’s (2019) conceptualization of digital objects from first principles in which each nonmaterial bearer (notably bitstrings) forms a layer borne out of another nonmaterial bearer and so on (e.g., as represented in the internet stack) (Tilson et al. 2010, Yoo et al. 2010b). The layering derives from the semiotic nature of the digital that combines the technical and the sociotechnical; the latter shows different social interests and demands for the structures of the bitstring as technical objects. The resulting set of layers of bitstrings (depicted in Figure 1 from one to N) ultimately is borne out and grounded in a material bearer. This binding highlights the semiotic emphasis of how bitstrings are related technically and gain meaning in the world and how they, during this process, materialized and are represented in potentially multiple material bearers. This gives salience to the digitization sense when evoking the digital label.

On a similar footing, Lyytinen (2021) persuasively lays out a model of digital representations consistent with the digitalization view. According to this view, the emphasis needs to be placed on the meaningful application of the bitstrings as digital objects in a real-world context such that it gives new options and possibilities for the actors to act in that context given the new affordances. This is aptly termed “contextual embedding” by Lyytinen (2021). Such a perspective highlights the agential character of digitalization in which actors perform digital objects in some social and material context whenever the digital label is used. The focus on the novelty is brought to bear by involved actors who, by innovatively performing with the digital object, unlock the latent potential within it and give a meaning to the object in each sociotechnical context.

Overall, prior literature establishes that digitization and digitalization differ conceptually. Ergo, the digitization of documents does not imply that a company executes a digitalization strategy. Digital in the digitalization sense would come with the idea that actors need to unlock the latent and novel possibilities surfaced by digital objects, which can be treated in ways that were not conspicuous and apparent prior to digitizing the representation. As Ross (2017) puts it eloquently, digitizing everything will not, by itself, make a business a digital business. This can be achieved only through continuing waves of digitalization that trigger waves of successive innovations in social and organizational settings (cf. Boland et al. 2007).

The ontological foundations illustrated in Figure 1 highlight how invoking the term “digital” in the proposed integrated view opens a continuous space in which any point in the continuum can be selected and highlighted using the term “digital.” In the proposed conceptualization, the two views, though analytically opposite and separate, do not exclude the presence of the other. Both views are sociotechnical in that they encompass levels of technical and social contextual elements as indicated by the dotted parts of the arrows in Figure 1. Though the digitization view is premised on a semiotic/technology-centric emphasis and related bindings, agents still play a key role in actualizing and using the semiotic representations when digitizing. Similarly, though the digitalization view is premised on the agential emphasis, with which actors enact and unlock the latent potential of the digital objects in the form of affordances, the view recognizes the critical role of (new) digital objects as semiotic representations and their material bearers that form a bedrock for creating such agential possibilities.<sup>3</sup> In line with this, we propose a shift from the ontological division of digital that is premised on the implicit assumption that digitization and digitalization form opposite ends of a spectrum (see Figure 2).

We advance an alternative position that recognizes that digital x assumes the simultaneous coexistence of both the digitization and digitalization views rather than considering them as opposite, separate dimensions (Figure 3). As digitizing advances (more digitized objects), the more varieties and potential for digitalization (more uses, affordances, action potential). Digitization is a necessary but not sufficient condition for such process to unfold. Both views are intrinsically intertwined and jointly shape the emergence and understanding of a digital x concept. We refer to this mutual, coentangled view as the coconstitutive ontology of digital.

When the conceptual positioning of digital x is considered coconstitutive, it becomes difficult to precisely separate between the level of digitization and digitalization. In line with this, despite the strong emphasis on the technology/character of bitstrings in digitization, the context remains relevant because of the necessary semiotic binding of all bitstrings to make them useful (Nambisan et al. 2020). The semiotic emphasis captures the fact that bitstrings need to have a connection to some real-world phenomena by standing for them as representations. For example, whereas the initial concept of a digital twin can be positioned within the digitization ontology of digital, it is ultimately about faithful semiotic representations of a real thing in a real-world setting, which resonates with the notion of digital too and idea of ontological integration (Baiyere et al. 2020b). Similarly, it is equally important to note that the digitalization view is derived from and dependent on the digitization view. This resonates with the notion of digital first and associated ontological reversal (Baskerville et al. 2020), in which the enactment of a digital object is implicated first in the semiotic (material) realm prior to its manifestation within the sociotechnical change. Per Figure 1, the two views can only be analytically separated; they coexist in conceptualizing and forming digital x. Sensitivity to this ontological foundation is important for creating a cumulative tradition in the study of digital x as we demonstrate.

## 3. Juxtaposing Digital and IT—Conceptual Linkages and Differences
### 3.1. Context Shifts—What Has Changed to Warrant a New Label?
With this backdrop, it is useful to review how the ontological foundations of digital relate to and are reflected in the evolving notions of IT and reflect contextual shifts in the field’s study of IT. For the most part of IT’s history, IT has been conceived as a “box” of hardware and software—a tight coupling between bitstrings, their operations, and material bearers—which captures specific flows of data, its processing, and related information yields in specific organizational settings (Lyytinen et al. 2004, Peppard 2018). The view foregrounds hardware and its concrete configurations and how the specific software functions are manifested in a concrete material configuration. In contrast, the code and the semiotic nature of bitstrings as digital objects embedded in the configuration remained in the background.

In the 1960s, as digitization was taking root, the box was the mainframe. It helped manage and automate routine, batch-oriented transactions, such as payroll or inventory control, and established standardized data flows and related representations (e.g., creating payroll and inventory records). The 1970s saw the emergence of more innovative systems (still boxes) that made available more versatile applications of computing and related digital representations to improve decision making in organizations (often called management information systems). These systems would connect users with organizational information processing tasks in ways that were not possible without creating new types of bitstrings and tying them with new kinds of material bearers (e.g., real-time transaction systems). They were programmed to input transactional data at the source of origin, automate related activities, and periodically produce managerial summary reports for internal control purposes. The systems were accompanied with novel innovations around digitizing digital objects (such as databases, transaction processing) and enabled new affordances (such as real-time decision analysis). In the 1980s, the advent of the Personal Computers (PC; new kind of box) localized bitstring recording and manipulation to common office settings. A hugely growing range of digital objects and their manipulations (such as email, document repositories, etc.) reached most pockets of organizations. A string of IT innovations produced a growing pool of tools to digitize most facets of office information and to represent and manipulate it through a rich variety of digital objects (such as spreadsheets and word processing). These objects provided managers and a growing number of knowledge workers with increasingly flexible information representations and tools to automate office tasks (Peppard 2018). The period saw also the emergence of highly connected strategic systems (again conceived as boxes) exemplified in integrated airline reservation or supply chain management systems that facilitated and streamlined interactions between customers and suppliers, using standardized digital objects (e.g., electronic data interchange messages).

In the 1990s the enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems went a step further in relating the bitstrings and boxes. They standardized and integrated the multifaceted ways in which data, processes, and applications connected across a majority of an organization’s key activities. This was accomplished by creating an organized collage of semiotic bitstrings (e.g., customer data and operations) that could be made visible, shared, and manipulated across the corporation. The innovation loosened the early tight connection within the box of hardware and software and bitstring operations. At the turn of the millennia, the advances in networking, including local area networks, wide area networks, and the internet, moved the bitstrings one step further away from the box. The advances made it feasible to access a wide range of internal and external digital objects from anywhere in the network and share data (and operations) across a network (e.g., URL and internet stack). Now, digital objects could be shared and manipulated at great speed and low cost from a distance and across organizations and contexts, creating unprecedented means for large-scale collaborations (e.g., open source) for sharing of standardized bitstring objects (e.g., e-commerce). It also introduced convergence whereby the tight coupling between earlier analog representations and their bearers could be broken (digitized music, news, publishing, film) (Tilson et al. 2010, Malhotra et al. 2021). Since then, we have witnessed the emergence of diverse types of radically innovative digital objects manifested in new kinds of content (e.g., social media) and transaction platforms (e.g., Uber, AirBnB, internet of things (IoT), robotics, robotic process automation, and so on) enabling new types of affordances.

So where does the recent rise of the digital x fit in all this? During the short history of IT, we have faced several times the need to forge a new story around the technology and its use. But we posit that a profound and fundamental context shift around digital x (through processes of digitization and digitalization) has taken place over the last two decades. It is a new context with which we need to reckon that was truly accelerated with the advent of the internet around 2000 (Hanseth and Lyytinen 2010, Tilson et al. 2010).

In this regard, the accelerated change experienced in the last 20 years is uncommon in the history of technology studies. In the broad realm of social science discourse around technology over the last 150 years, major changes in the capability and scope of technology have been infrequent and only detected within long economic waves that took multiple decades (50–70 years) to realize (see, e.g., Hughes 1989). In fact, most dominant economics and sociology-based explanations of technology effects in the past come with the assumption that technology remains relatively fixed for a relatively long time, and therefore, the language of how the social embraces and connects with technology does not change significantly even when the technology advances rapidly in relative cost or performance (Nambisan 2017). Hence, in past accounts of technological change, the organizing logic, social/managerial practices, and related explanations could mostly be fixed for a relatively long period given the relatively stable technological “underbelly” (Yoo 2012).

However, given the recent progress of information technology capabilities, such fixed notions and related explanations do not appear to work. Since the mid 1990s, the exponential growth in connectivity, computing power, and storage capacity of and related expansive IT use has produced new realms of digitizing with new digitalization outcomes expressed in truly novel phenomena (e.g., e-commerce, platforms), new fields of inquiry (e.g., social computing), and original business concepts (e.g., agility, distributed organizing, open innovation). In the first two decades of the 21st century, IT reached an unprecedented critical infrastructural presence in most industrial societies. It is now everywhere and mostly invisible; it shapes all forms and pockets of social behavior and order, including economics, politics, civil society, and the rest (Tilson et al. 2010). This unprecedented and fast infrastructuring has produced, at a growing pace, novel features, functions, and capabilities that have been or are being integrated into the expanding digital fold of organizing including web 2.0, web 3.0., mobile, IoT, cloud, and big data just to name few (Ross et al. 2016, Sebastian et al. 2017). All these rest on forms and processes of digitization and digitalization and pose the question of how they can be performed and applied effectively across contexts.

#### 3.1.1. Key Context Shifts—IT to Digital
We next synthesize what we deem are the pivotal characteristics in this new epoch that justifies the use of the label “digital x.” Many of these have been recognized in the nascent literature seeking to motivate the change of label from “IT” to “digital.” Per our review, we condense these into four ongoing shifts, which we proffer as foundational: (1) agential, (2) semiotic, (3) infrastructural cum combinatorial, and (4) economic shifts. Whereas each of the shifts comes with a unique thread of beliefs and assumptions, they interact and are jointly implicated in most digital endeavors.

##### 3.1.1.1. Agential Shifts
The shift from IT x to digital x reflects the ever-present, growing need to account for multiple, emergent, and new (systemic) properties of digital technology and the ways in which actors leverage these properties. This reflects the focus on identifying, presenting, and manipulating a growing variety of heterogeneous digital objects (the so-called “data as the new oil”). The extremely complex and fluid assemblages of material bearers and digital objects present in organizational settings have changed the role, properties, and relationships of IT use across most social and business settings. This has transformed the agential emphasis that the social and the technical elements involved in digitalization now jointly exhibit. Simply put, they produce novel sociotechnical arrangements and associated behaviors with new agencies, affordances, and related outcomes (Tilson et al. 2010, Yoo et al. 2010a, Sarker et al. 2019). To put this in another way, actors can now act differently because of deep changes in IT properties, functions, and features. They now radically expand and reallocate the scope and range of affordances for involved actors and are changing or have changed the idea of agency to include both human and technology (Baird and Maruping 2021, Lyytinen et al. 2021). This a new type of joint agency that cannot be accounted for by explaining human uses of well-defined and isolated technology functions characterizing the use of IT during the IT era.

For example, IT as an object in the IT x story is commonly attributed to specific and circumscribed technical properties of the IT part of the digitization process, such as the access to a PC, its user interface, networks, and properties of the mainframe backend having database and transaction capabilities. This configuration of technology gave involved actors, such as organizations, the ability to conduct transactions at scale or exchange email at low cost, long distance, and high scale. In the digital x story, infrastructural technology elements configure dynamically, for instance, by integrating multiple mobile applications, high bandwidth and permanent connectivity, sensors, application programming interfaces (APIs), and cloud computing, which then confer an unprecedented level of programmability, addressability, communicability, traceability, and associability for involved digital objects (Yoo et al. 2010a, Kallinikos et al. 2013, von Briel et al. 2018). The agency to create such changes and modifications has also shifted. The emergence of new kinds of digital objects and their manifold uses are now reckoned by involved social actors as important dimensions of the digital x story. Many, if not most, of such changes enable, anticipate, or assume deeper transformations in the deployment of digital objects in social settings, such as a call to change business logic, the speed of organizational responses, and the scope of innovation outcomes (Yoo et al. 2010a, Nambisan 2017, Chanias et al. 2019, Baiyere et al. 2020a). Moreover, agency itself can change dynamically from human agency to varied forms of technology agency (i.e., machine learning, robotic process automation, etc.) as part of the deeper transformation (Baird and Maruping 2021, Lyytinen et al. 2021).

In the IT x story, the IT did mostly something for the actor; in the digital x story, digital does what IT could do, but the narrative expands the actor’s flexibility, potential for action, and speed given the manifold affordances at its disposal. For instance, sensors can autonomously keep track of the status of a machine and learn to alert users to act when necessary. Combining sensors with machine learning allows predicting when maintenance is needed and triggering other actors to act on it. This happens now to such an extent that it has the potential to produce novel organizational outcomes, including new business models (Weill and Woerner 2015) (often in unpredictable ways)—a feature coined as generativity (Lyytinen et al. 2017, Fürstenau et al. 2019). The new type of agency is viewed as being joined, combined, or hybrid because it is difficult to pin down when the social starts and technology ends and vice versa.

##### 3.1.1.2. Semiotic Shifts
Digital objects qua semiotic representations express both behaviors (program code) and states or events (data) of the world. Generally, within a digital object, neither of its elements, either code or data, has much value without the other. Nor do they have value unless they become contextualized (Lyytinen 2021). Such contextualization underlies all digitalization processes in that a chosen form of materialization (mapping to material bearer) is a critical enabling mechanism to contextualize the digital object and its behaviors. Such contextualization entails that actors can account for digital objects as something meaningful to use; that is, they are able to build up some type of affordance from the use of digital object, such as the “like” in Facebook, “trade” in high-frequency trading systems, or a “game move” in Go.

The need for contextualization entailed by the semiotic quality of digital objects has become highly pronounced during the digital x era. This is due to the manifold number and nature of digital objects available to actors as well as the ability to transform and interact with these objects. This widens agential core of organizations and expands the uses of digital objects to a wider range of settings in which they can be used and what they possibly represent (Lyytinen 2021). The scope, nature, and quality of these semiotic bindings is not similar to the physical binding between physical components (such as an engine and a power train). Because of the social nature of the semiotic binding, the bindings remain institutionally and socially mediated and socially approximate. When the bindings change by agreement, fiat, or negotiation, they mold surrounding social institutions (Oshri et al. 2018). Given this unaccounted and indeterminate nature of semiotic bindings, digital objects can promote innovation through constant repurposing by which actors discover alternative and unexpected ways of binding the digital objects in the same setting, and/or expanding them to other social settings. Actors can discover alternative and unexpected ways of binding the digital objects (and expanding them) to other social settings or invent new digital objects that draw upon other available digital objects, thereby promoting generativity (Hukal and Henfridsson 2017). For example, a digital object representing a weather forecast can be displayed in a mobile weather app, on a home Echo device, or on a screen on an umbrella. These varying bindings each can have varying manifestations on social structures and result in different behaviors. Hence, traditional economies of scale and scope that characterize industrial-era technologies and their uses hardly apply fully given the semiotic shift (Chandler 1990).

##### 3.1.1.3. Infrastructural cum Combinatorial Shifts
A profound context shift around conceptualizing digital started after the advent of the internet and the related service stack (Hanseth and Lyytinen 2010). Instead of cramming an additional narrow spectrum of functionality into a single programmed box or a monolithic technology configuration (such as an ERP system), the technology enabling digitization now became distributed and infrastructural (Tilson et al. 2010). This was later enabled by novel digitizing architecture innovations that now enable loosely coupled interactions between manifold digital objects using open technical standards, such as APIs and representational state transfer protocols resulting in the emergence of cloud service stacks (e.g., Amazon Web Services, Azure, Google Cloud Platform).

Consequently, this has enabled new combinatorial possibilities in how companies and innovators leverage and use digital objects. The presence, access, and use of myriad digital objects and their configuration and manipulation across a wide range of settings and technological systems have become the guiding principle and organizing logic to innovate and operate enterprises, industries, and society. Essentially, each digital object made possible via the infrastructural base becomes a potential building block for creating another digital object via combining and (re)combining digital objects with near infinite possibilities. This combinatorial character of digital objects comes with sweeping consequences.

Today, innovation—inventing original forms of digitization and implementing them in innovative ways, resulting in novel organizational structures and operations (digitalization)—is primarily about how to pool together a range of new (derived) and old digital objects and affordances and organize them for contextual delivery in ways that add value. The installed base of (digital) infrastructure facilitates the creation and fast diffusion of innovative combinations of digital objects and their operations. The integration and pooling happens mainly through open interfaces (APIs) and standardized mechanisms of their use (interface protocols). Beneath the surface, the infrastructure still consists of boxes, but they come in multiple heterogeneous sizes, forms, and configurations. These configurations are highly dynamic and range from hidden big and powerful systems (e.g., such as enormous server clusters running Hadoop) to tiny hardware (e.g., sensors on physical objects). But they are now largely virtualized and can be rearranged for better connectivity, which constantly produces new sets of digital objects, their embeddings, and new affordances (Kohli and Grover 2008, Tilson et al. 2010, Henfridsson and Bygstad 2013, Lyytinen 2021, Piccoli et al. 2020, 2022).

This infrastructural cum combinatorial shift differs from innovating in the IT era. Consider the evolution of musical devices from the 1980s to the streaming infrastructure of the 2020s. Earlier, the music encoding on a CD could be played only on the CD player: the box. However, if we reduce the functionality of this product to its digital core as an affordance, it is about a user’s ability to listen to music in any selected sequence while moving. The shift to digital was in creating first the core affordance that could leverage the capacities of the digital infrastructure to pool together other affordances. In this setting, songs become first a shareable digital object that offers the same function as the CD/cassette offered as a box for listening to songs. The first fully digital solutions, outside the box, such as Rio (for playing mp3 files), did exactly this (Tilson et al. 2021). But, as the same affordance is now enabled by a wide range of digital solutions, such as a growing variety of mobile devices, the internet access (websites), related digital assets for storing and retrieving songs, the services offering the initial core affordances now are bundles of digital capabilities that offer in varying forms the basic functionality (e.g., iTunes, Spotify, Pandora). At the same time, the core affordance of listening to a song is augmented with an expansive set of new affordances, many of which involve combinations of new and other digital objects. These include among others playing at random, offering nearly limitless information and comments about the song, creating alternatively ordered playlists, automatically playing selected songs at different times, creating favorite playlists across all available music, automatically searching for music with specific profiles, ranking and recommending music, and so on, apparently endlessly. All these affordances result in new expanded versions of digital objects of songs and their listening experience through enacting those affordances. The digital infrastructure allows users to combine and (re)combine digital objects to create new innovative possibilities, such as sharing music listening interests and information among friends (by sharing playlists) and across other devices (such as listening to the playlist via a refrigerator or in an Uber ride). It is worth noting that each of these combined digital objects can subsequently be recombined with other digital objects to create new innovations across manifold contexts. In this case, the digital core of encoding music and playing it on single material technology (the CD player) that formed the starting point for digitizing has been expanded by a constant provisioning of novel affordances, including the ability to even create new music by sampling digital parts of accessible music.

Such a shift raises the need to theorize more cogently of the new kind of combinatorial value generation afforded by cumulative expansion of infrastructural capabilities. Value and innovation are less about creating specific functions in new boxes and more about the fluid emergence of new embeddings and affordances enabled by the constantly expanding digital infrastructure with new combinations of digital objects. Digital is less about adjusting sociotechnical relationships around a set of fixed technology functions (IT) and more about how sociotechnical elements and relationships constantly emerge, intermingle, and change, whereas new forms of innovative digitization emerge in a combinatorial fashion calling for deeper digitalization in new affordances, contexts of use, etc. (Yoo et al. 2010a, Henfridsson and Bygstad 2013).

##### 3.1.1.4. Economics Shift
Another fundamental context shift is that digital x comes with unique economics. The cost of computing in the (IT) box world was characterized by a tight coupling between hardware and software and related costs. They both had relatively high cost (to produce software and acquire the hardware and then install it). In the digital x world, we are experiencing a shift to crowdsourced opensource software and related innovations, cloud solutions, and service-oriented computing. These shifts have radically accelerated the decline in the cost of moving and processing bits to create value and how to monitor and control such costs (different from the decline resulting from Moore’s law though Moore’s law is necessary for this to happen). These shifts have moved the cost structure from fixed cost toward variable costs with costs declining during both design (cloud-based service applications, microservice architectures) and use (cloud computing). More important though is that the digital objects and their behaviors can be easily replicated, combined, and shared many times over at minuscule or no cost (Yoo et al. 2010a). So, once reified into a digital object, any process or behavior related to that object can be replicated throughout the organization, the (digital) product itself can be replicated (even customized) across a varied customer base, and digital objects can be combined to create additional objects and affordances, all at minimal cost with little or no capacity constraints. This has tremendous implications for value creation and business strategy (Kenney and Zysman 2015, Weill and Woerner 2015).

In sum, as infrastructural technology, in which digital objects and bitstrings have become the key resource and capability, digital and its use has gained the power to cut across the organizational, social, or natural fabric in unprecedented ways. It allows for the generation and consolidation of swaths of data, which, in turn, enables new types of social connections and behaviors (Yoo et al. 2010a, Henfridsson and Bygstad 2013, Grover et al. 2020). This creates new powerful feedback loops for growth and scaling. Because of the unique economics, data has become highly valuable, but at the same time, it can be shared (made a common good), analyzed, combined, repurposed, or gamified at little or no cost (Brennen and Kreiss 2016, Ross et al. 2017).

#### 3.1.2. An Illustrative Example—Context Shifts in IT to Digital x
Within specific organizational domains, the main context shifts that warrant a move from thinking in terms of IT notions to digital vary. We next briefly highlight how the four outlined context shifts justify the change in the vocabulary used in relation to when x is transformation in the prior literature. Specifically, we survey research on digital transformation and IT-enabled organizational transformation at the organizational level using the illustration in Table 1.

IT transformation at the organizational level is characterized by the process of implementing technologies that allow internal organizational processes to be digitized. The aim is to improve operational efficiency among other productivity gains. Typical examples are well-documented ERP implementation initiatives (Morton 1990, Barrett and Walsham 1999, Crowston and Myers 2004). Within this setting, the ERP technology helps enterprises to unlock value when organizational actors exercise their agency in the use of ERP systems by creating structures that leverage affordances embedded in the system (Markus and Benjamin 1997, Crowston and Myers 2004). The primary path to value creation is to create structures and other complementary assets (process and human capital changes) that can leverage the technology (Kohli and Grover 2008). Such IT transformation efforts help others minimize the limitations of (human) bounded rationality (Simon 1972) by enabling human actors to make decisions that leverage the swift processing and delivery of a vast amount of condensed information (Morton 1990, Gregory et al. 2015).

However, recent context shifts challenge the appropriateness of drawing on the IT transformation concept to fully capture contemporary phenomena. (Content truncated for brevity; refer to original document for complete details.)

## 5.3.4. Explore New Domains of Digital x
The idea coined in this essay, that x conveys a variable that stands for the field’s pertinent and long-standing phenomena and related concepts but which, at the same time, can be used as an input to alternative forms of theorizing (IT x versus digital x), is, to our knowledge, novel. Although, in this essay, we focus on the benefits of contrasting digital x with IT x in situations in which the benefit is obvious, we are sure that there are other untapped values for x that either we missed (e.g., governance, development) or may not have an IT equivalent but are currently emerging. For example, we note an increased use of monikers such as digital entrepreneurship, digital marketing, digital money, etc., but such terms were unknown in the format of IT x (IT entrepreneurship, IT marketing, or IT money). This suggests that there is ample room to expand the import of digital—and indeed grow the field—beyond the current shores of IS phenomena.<sup>5</sup> By doing so, exploratory digital x research has the potential to align IS research with new communities and advance digital x research as a reference point to other disciplines.

The focus of this essay is on central elements of digital that enable agents to act and perform in ways that differ from the ways they did in the past; that is, what new affordances and joint interactions are emerging from novel ways of combining the social and technological? These elements and affordances have opened or are opening a plethora of opportunities for future research. It is difficult to say where the digital universe is ultimately heading because of its fluidity. But we are certain that it will continue to rise forward with unexpected outcomes given the recent rise of new digital capacities, including AI, IoT, and blockchain. We live in exciting times that offer ample opportunities for fresh theorizing at the nexus between the social and technical as we digitize and digitalize. Furthermore, as the digital x phenomenon spreads unencumbered to other disciplines, it is important for the IS field to lead the charge in theorizing about digital x. This is critical for the field’s future as several management disciplines face the need to adopt their theoretical positions that connect digital to the x within their domain. How the IS field can successfully advance the new positioning as part of the emerging discourse around digital is a critical research quest for the discipline in the coming decade and beyond.

## Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the sharp and constructive guidance of the senior editor and his support in shaping this paper. Appreciation also goes to the anonymous associate editor and Reviewer 1, whose comments on the first round of the paper gave the paper its current direction. In the same light, they owe Reviewer 2 and Reviewer 3 much gratitude for their constructive and encouraging comments that have proved developmental in advancing the paper to its current state. Although anonymous, the review team deserves much credit for their immense role in shaping the paper’s message. The authors also acknowledge colleagues and friends who have contributed in elevating their thinking as they developed the ideas in this paper: Nicholas Berente, Jeanne Ross, Gabriele Piccoli, Heli B, and Youngjin Yoo. Many thanks go to the participants of International Conference of Information Systems 2017 Digital x panel, Academy of Management 2019 Digital x Symposium, AoM 2019 Digital Practice Paper Development Workshop, and International Society of Professional Innovation Management 2022 Digital x panel. The authors also appreciate the insightful comments received during the presentation of the message of the paper to practitioners and at the University of Turku (Inforte), University of Manchester, Loughborough University, Leuphania University, University of Cologne, RMIT University, Deakin University, University of South Florida Tampa, Concordia University, and University of New South Wales, among others.

## Appendix A. Examples of Applying Proposed Guidelines
### A.1. Guideline 1: Sensitivity to Ontological Position
With digital money, the emphasis is on the semiotic representation and further abstraction of money (Dodgson et al. 2015, Pshenichnikov and Babkin 2017). Scholars that focus on this dominant technical valence of digital money draw on the “digital” term with a technological underlay provided by the bitstring form of money.

With digital disruption, the emphasis is on the agency exercised by actors to alter a status quo in a domain by leveraging digital technology (Riemer and Johnston 2019). This can be seen from a digitalization perspective in terms of the paradigm shift that is unveiled by applying digital technology to rethink or upend established norms within a given sociotechnical context. See Table A.1. for a summary.

### A.2. Guideline 2: Justify Context Shifting
The semiotic shift captures a key context shifting that warrants the move from the traditional notion of money to digital money. In essence, the articulation and construction of digital money as a concept became salient when the notion of money as a tangible resource (i.e., cash/bills) was no longer sufficient to capture the semiotic representation of money in terms of bitstrings (Dodgson et al. 2015, Adrian and Mancini-Griffoli 2021). Whereas the semiotic shift is arguably the most salient shift in the case of digital money, other shifts could also be argued for.

In contrast, the agential shift is a core shift that necessitates the move from IT disruption to digital disruption. Whereas the IT disruption conception focused on disruptions caused by technology breakdown or technology-related issues (Dynes et al. 2009, Qu and Jiang 2019), the notion of digital disruption elevates the agent’s role in unlocking disruption via the novel application of technology, which alters established norms and confounds the prior organizing logics that have characterized a context before (Skog et al. 2018, Riemer and Johnston 2019, Baiyere and Hukal 2020). Whereas the agential shift is arguably the most salient shift in this case, other shifts, such as infrastructural cum combinatorial, and unique economics are enabling shifts that make agential shifts possible. See Table A.2 for an overview of both examples.

### A.3. Guideline 3: Demonstrate the Signified Qualitative Difference
A key delineation that the concept of digital money brings to the fore is that value is encapsulated in bitstrings as a bearer of value whereas the established assumption of money is that it is encapsulated in the form of physical cash (bills) as a bearer of value whereas its digital presentations (as those of money on bank accounts or when using credit cards) are secondary. This is the digital first notion by which the digital money precedes the physical money and the latter can have multiple incarnations (Baskerville et al. 2020). As opposed to seeing money as a physical tender (cash), digital money signifies a qualitative difference reflecting a view of money as a legal tender despite abstracting it into a bitstring form. With the liquefaction of physical money into its bitstring form, digital money as a conceptual label signifies an extension in the thinking about money such that it can be spatially separated from the location of a transaction and open up new modes of value exchange across media and material bearers (Dodgson et al. 2015, Adrian and Mancini-Griffoli 2021).

With digital disruption, a key delineation from IT disruption is that it entails a paradigmatic shift in modus operandi brought about by the application of digital technology (Riemer and Johnston 2019) instead of disruptions brought about by the breakdown of IT systems or infrastructure (Qu and Jiang 2019). This signifies a qualitatively different scale, scope, and source of disruption between digital and the IT equivalent. Essentially, the location of technology in both disruptions is fundamentally different such that attributing the phenomena captured by digital disruption with IT disruption amounts to a misallocation of agency. See Table A.3 for an overview.

### Table A.1. Ontological Position Illustration for Digital Money and Digital Disruption
| Guidelines | Guiding Question | Actionable Suggestions |
|-----------|-----------------|-----------------------|
| **Guideline 1: Ontological position** | What ontological positions does the study subscribe to? | - Articulate the ontological standpoint adopted.<br>- Outline why this is the appropriate view for your specific x inquiry.<br>- Alternatively, offer a new ontological stance, if relevant. |
| **Digital money** | **Illustration**<br>- Ontological standpoint: Coconstitutive view with emphasis on digitization.<br>- Why? Emphasis is on the semiotic representation of money abstracted from the physical form (notes) to the varied bitstring forms. | |
| **Digital disruption** | **Illustration**<br>- Ontological standpoint: Coconstitutive view with emphasis on digitalization.<br>- Why? Emphasis is on the agential possibilities to unlock new affordances from a technology in order to profoundly change a status quo in a context. | |

### Table A.2. Justified Context Shifting Illustration for Digital Money and Digital Disruption
| Guidelines | Guiding Question | Actionable Suggestions |
|-----------|-----------------|-----------------------|
| **Guideline 2: Justified context shifting** | What is new/has changed about the x context that warrants a new label? | - Identify the observed context shift(s) in your specific x domain.<br>- Justify why the observed shifts warrant a new label.<br>- Draw on the four outlined context shifts or formulate other reasoned context shifts to support your arguments. |
| **Digital money** | **Illustration**<br>- Example of identified context shift(s): Semiotic shift and infrastructural cum combinatorial shift.<br>- Justification:<br>  - Semiotic shift: the shift from the view of money as a tangible resource to a semiotic representational<br>  - Infrastructural cum combinatorial shift: Emergence of new forms of value unlocked by the novel potentials of the digitized form of money, such as cryptocurrencies (e.g., bitcoin) and derivatives such as nonfungible token | |
| **Digital disruption** | **Illustration**<br>- Example of identified context shift(s): Agential shift and unique economics shift.<br>- Justification:<br>  - Agential shift: The shift from the view of technology breakdown leading to disruption to a view in which agents unlock disruption based on novel application of technology to alter established norms/status quo and organizing logic.<br>  - Unique economics shift: The economics around disruption shift from the technology as the nucleus that determines the scale and scope of impact to the extent to which the paradigmatic change upends past economic models in sociotechnical contexts. For example, the economic impact of the digital disruption of streaming to the video and music industry is not limited to Netflix or Spotify but applies to the whole industry. | |

### Table A.3. Qualitative Difference Illustration for Digital Money and Digital Disruption
| Guidelines | Guiding Question | Actionable Suggestions |
|-----------|-----------------|-----------------------|
| **Guideline 3: Signified qualitative difference** | What is the salient qualitative difference between digital x and IT x that is being signified? | - Outline the prior knowledge or assumptions of your chosen domain.<br>- Propose the digital x variant for conceptualizing phenomena in your domain.<br>- Identify the qualitative difference between the prior knowledge and the advanced digital x concept through careful institution.<br>- Demonstrate the conceptual merit, empirical insight, and practical value of the applied digital x concepts. |
| **Digital money** | **Illustration**<br>- Prior assumptions of money concept: Money is encapsulated in the form of physical cash (bills being printed) as a bearer of value.<br>- Proposed conceptualization of digital money: Means of exchange by which value is encapsulated exclusively in bitstrings as a bearer of value.<br>- Qualitative difference between money and digital money: for example, change in form from physical to bitstrings, paradigmatic change in modes of value exchange, a foundation for technology-based derivatives of money such as cryptocurrencies, nonfungible tokens, etc.<br>- Value of digital money conceptualization: Digital money’s conceptualization frees scholarship and practice from the limitations of prior conceptualization of money—as a physical means of exchange and bearer of value that by necessity is tethered to the bearer for exchange to happen—to a concept that embraces the spatially void idea of money enabling new modes of value exchange. | |
| **Digital disruption** | **Illustration**<br>- Prior assumptions of IT disruption concept: Disruption occurs as an alteration of normal functions because of the breakdown of IT systems or infrastructure.<br>- Proposed conceptualization of digital disruption: Disruption occurs as a profound alteration of a dominant paradigm or the established norms/status quo of a context because of novel applications of digital technology.<br>- Qualitative difference between IT disruption and digital disruption: for example, engenders a change in a dominant paradigm that upends the prior modus operandi and logics of a context as opposed to IT disruption, which is primarily a discontinuity because of technology malfunctions. Another core difference lies in the scale, scope, and source of disruption as well as a fundamental distinction in the location of technology in the disruption process, etc.<br>- Value of digital disruption conceptualization: Digital disruption conceptualization frees scholarship and practice from the limitations of prior conceptualization of IT disruption—as an IT-induced alteration—to a concept that embraces the possibilities for disruption to be induced by the actions of agents afforded by technology. | |

## Endnotes
<sup>1</sup> One example of such interest is the ongoing AACSB funded project, MaCuDe—Curriculum for the Digital Era, that seeks to establish new digital curricula to all management disciplines (see https://macude.org/).

<sup>2</sup> Our goal is not to come up with a precise, universal delineation between digital and IT. One reviewer eloquently characterized such a goal as akin to nailing jelly to the wall. The term “digital” is now commonly used and has acquired multiple and contextual meanings that are impossible to reverse. Our objective is more humble, that is, to chart a path for a reflective use of the term in our research so that it does not lose its conceptual benefit. Attending to this provides direction and conceptual clarity to the field’s research and helps us handle responsively the emerging digital phenomena.

<sup>3</sup> It is useful to note that both digitization and digitalization are implicated in digital x. If we do not digitize, our semiotic linkages to the social world are based on IT boxes of hardware and software rather than digital objects (IT x). If we do not give the bitstrings and their material bearers meaning in the context, then we have no action potential.

<sup>4</sup> This is in no way a statement of the quality of the study or its value in the IT x context. We just contrast these studies with digital x studies.

<sup>5</sup> Some IS departments are renaming their departments and programs with the digital moniker. Of course, such labels are replete with not only definition issues but a variety of political manifestations.

## References
- Adrian T, Mancini-Griffoli T (2021) The rise of digital money. *Annual Rev. Financial Econom.* 13:57–77.
- Agarwal R, Gao G, DesRoches C, Jha AK (2010) Research commentary—The digital transformation of healthcare: Current status and the road ahead. *Inform. Systems Res.* 21(4):796–809.
- Baird A, Maruping LM (2021) The next generation of research on IS use: A theoretical framework of delegation to and from agentic IS artifacts. *Management Inform. Systems Quart.* 45(1):315–341.
- Baiyere A, Rissanen J (2019) Digital “x”: Beyond bounded rationality, toward a theory of bounded imagination. Bitran I, Conn S, Gernreich C, Heber M, Huizingh E, Kokshagina O, Torkkeli M, Tynnhammar M, eds. *Proc. XXX ISPIM Innovation Conference, Italy*.
- Baiyere A, Salmela H, Tapanainen T (2020a) Digital transformation and the new logics of business process management. *Eur. J. Inform. Systems* 29(3):238–259.
- Baiyere A, Grover V, Gupta A, Woerner S, Lyytinen K (2017) Digital “x”: A new tune for IS research or old wine in new bottles. *Proc. 38th Internat. Conf. Inform. Systems* (Association for Information Systems), 2236–2240.
- Baiyere A, Topi H, Venkatesh V, Wyatt J, Donnellan B (2020b) The internet of things (IoT): A research agenda for information systems. *Comm. Assoc. Inform. Systems* 47(1):21.
- Barrett M, Walsham G (1999) Electronic trading and work transformation in the London insurance market. *Inform. Systems Res.* 10(1):1–22.
- Baskerville RL, Myers MD, Yoo Y (2020) Digital first: The ontological reversal and new challenges for information systems research. *Management Inform. Systems Quart.* 44(2):509–523.
- Benbasat I, Zmud RW (2003) The identity crisis within the IS discipline: Defining and communicating the discipline’s core properties. *Management Inform. Systems Quart.* 27(2):183–194.
- Crowston K, Myers MD (2004) Information technology and the transformation of industries: Three research perspectives. *J. Strategic Inform. Systems* 13(1):5–28.
- Dave C, Ellis-Chadwick F (1996) *Digital Marketing* (Pearson, UK).
- Davenport TH (1997) The new industrial engineering: Information technology and business process redesign. *Sloan Management Rev.* 31(4):11–27.
- Davison RM, Tarafdar M (2018) Shifting baselines in information systems research threaten our future relevance. *Inform. Systems J.* 28(4):587–591.
- DiMaggio PJ (1995) Comments on “what theory is not.” *Admin. Sci. Quart.* 40(3):391–397.
- Dodgson M, Gann D, Wladawsky-Berger I, Sultan N, George G (2015) Managing digital money. *Acad. Management J.* 58(2):325–333.
- Dynes S, Pixley S, Madory D (2009) Managing risk of IT disruptions in healthcare settings: A continuity of operations planning process. *AMCIS 2009 Proc.*, 161.
- Endres H, Indulska M, Ghosh A, Baiyere A, Broser S (2019) Industrial internet of things (IIoT) business model classification. *40th Internat. Conf. Inform. Systems*, 2988.
- Faulkner P, Runde J (2019) Theorizing the digital object. *Management Inform. Systems Quart.* 43(4):1279–1302.
- Fürstenau J, Baiyere A, Kliewer N (2019) A dynamic model of embeddedness in digital infrastructures. *Inform. Systems Res.* 30(4):1319–1342.
- Galliers RD (2003) Change as crisis or growth? Toward a transdisciplinary view of information systems as a field of study: A response to Benbasat and Zmud’s call for returning to the IT artifact. *J. Assoc. Inform. Systems* 4(1):13.
- Goblick T, Holsinger J (1967) Analog source digitization: A comparison of theory and practice (Corresp.). *IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory* 13(2):323–326.
- Gray J, Rumpe B (2015) Models for digitalization. *Software Systems Model.* 14(4):1319–1320.
- Gregory RW, Keil M, Muntermann J, Mahring M (2015) Paradoxes and the nature of ambidexterity in IT transformation programs. *Inform. Systems Res.* 26(1):57–80.
- Grover V, Lyytinen K (2015) New state of play in IS research: The push to the edge. *Management Inform. Systems Quart.* 39(2):271–296.
- Grover V, Lyytinen K (2022) The pursuit of innovative theory in the digital transformation. *J. Inform. Tech.* Forthcoming. https://doi.org/10.1177/02683962221077112
- Grover V, Lindberg A, Benbasat I, Lyytinen K (2020) The perils and promises of big data research in information systems. *J. Assoc. Inform. Systems* 21(2):268–291.
- Habermas J (1984) *The Theory of Communicative Action, vol. 1* (Beacon Press, Boston, MA).
- Hanseth O, Lyytinen K (2010) Design theory for dynamic complexity in information infrastructures: The case of building internet. *J. Inform. Tech.* 25(1):1–19.
- Henfridsson O, Bygstad B (2013) The generative mechanisms of digital infrastructure evolution. *Management Inform. Systems Quart.* 37(3):907–931.
- Hughes T (1989) *American Genesis: A Century of Invention and Technological Enthusiasm, 1870–1970* (University of Chicago Press, Chicago).
- Hukal P, Henfridsson O (2017) Digital innovation—A definition and integrated perspective. Galliers RD, Stein M, eds. *The Routledge Companion to Management Information Systems* (Routledge, New York), 199–214.
- Hylving L, Schultze U (2013) Evolving the modular layered architecture in digital innovation: The case of the car’s instrument cluster. *Proc. 34th Internat. Conf. Inform. Systems* (Association for Information Systems), 1–17.
- Jöhnk J (2020) Managing digital transformation: Challenges and choices in organizational design and decision-making. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Universität Bayreuth, Rechts-und Wirtschaftswissenschaftliche Fakultät, Germany.
- Kallinikos J, Aaltonen A, Marton A (2013) The ambivalent ontology of digital artifacts. *Management Inform. Systems Quart.* 37(2):357–370.
- Kenney M, Zysman J (2015) Choosing a future in the platform economy: The implications and consequences of digital platforms. *Kauffman Foundation New Entrepreneurial Growth Conf.*, vol. 156160.
- King JL, Lyytinen K (2004) Reach and grasp. *Management Inform. Systems Quart.* 28(4):539–551.
- Kohli R, Grover V (2008) Business value of IT: An essay on expanding research directions to keep up with the times. *J. Assoc. Inform. Systems* 9(1):23–39.
- Kohli R, Melville NP (2019) Digital innovation: A review and synthesis. *Inform. Systems J.* 29(1):200–223.
- Leidner DE (2018) Review and theory symbiosis: An introspective retrospective. *J. Assoc. Inform. Systems* 19(6):552–567.
- Lucas H Jr, Agarwal R, Clemons EK, El Sawy OA, Weber B (2013) Impactful research on transformational information technology: An opportunity to inform new audiences. *Management Inform. Systems Quart.* 37(2):371–382.
- Lyytinen K (2021) Innovation logics in the digital era: A systemic review of the emerging digital innovation regime. *Innovation Organ. Management* 24(1):13–34.
- Lyytinen K, Rose G, Yoo Y (2010) Learning routines and disruptive technological change: Hyper-learning in seven software development organizations during internet adoption. *Inform. Systems J.* 20(2):165–193.
- Lyytinen K, Sørensen C, Tilson D (2017) Generativity in digital infrastructures: A research note. Galliers RD, Stein M, eds. *The Routledge Companion to Management Information Systems* (Routledge, New York), 253–275.
- Lyytinen K, Yoo Y, Boland R (2016) Digital product innovation within four classes of innovation networks. *Inform. System J.* 26(1):47–75.
- Lyytinen K, Varshney U, Ackerman MS, Davis G, Avital M, Robey D, Sawyer S (2004) Surfing the next wave: Design and implementation challenges of ubiquitous computing environments. *Comm. Assoc. Inform. Systems* 13:697–716.
- Malhotra A, Majchrzak A, Lyytinen K (2021) Socio-technical affordances for large-scale collaborations. *Organ. Sci.* 32(5):1371–1390.
- Markus M, Benjamin R (1997) The magic bullet theory in IT-enabled transformation. *Sloan Management Rev.* 38(2):55–68.
- Morton MS, ed. (1990) *The Corporation of the 1990s: Information Technology and Organizational Transformation* (Oxford University Press, New York).
- Nambisan S (2017) Digital entrepreneurship: Toward a digital technology perspective of entrepreneurship. *Entrepreneurship Theory Practice* 41(6):1029–1055.
- Nambisan S, Lyytinen K, Yoo Y (2020) Digital innovation: Toward a transdisciplinary perspective. Nambisan S, Lyytinen K, Yoo Y, eds. *Handbook of Digital Innovation* (Edward Elgar Publishing, UK), 2–13.
- Oshri I, Henfridsson O, Kotlarsky J (2018) Re-representation as work design in outsourcing: A semiotic view. *Management Inform. Systems Quart.* 42(1):1–23.
- Parmiggiani E, Teracino E, Huysman M, Jones M, Mueller B, Mikalsen M (2020) OASIS 2019 panel report: A glimpse at the “post-digital.” *Comm. Assoc. Inform. Systems* 47(1):29.
- Peppard J (2018) Rethinking the concept of the IS organization. *Inform. Systems J.* 28(1):76–103.
- Piccoli G, Rodriguez J, Grover V (2020) Digital strategic initiatives and digital resources: Construct definition and future research directions. *Proc. Internat. Conf. Inform. Systems*.
- Piccoli G, Rodriguez J, Grover V (2022) Strategic initiatives and digital resources: Construct definition and future research directions. *Management Inform. Systems Quart.* Forthcoming.
- Pshenichnikov VV, Babkin AV (2017) Digital money as a product of the development of information and telecommunication technologies. *Quality Management, Transport and Information Security, Information Technologies*, 259–265.
- Qu XS, Jiang Z (2019) A time-based dynamic synchronization policy for consolidated database systems. *Management Inform. Systems Quart.* 43(4):1041–1057.