## Research paper

# **Third-party induced cyber incidents—much ado about nothing?**

## **Michel Benaroch[\\*](#page-0-0)**

Whitman School of Management, Syracuse University, 721 University Ave., Syracuse, NY 13244, USA

<span id="page-0-0"></span><sup>∗</sup>Correspondence address. Whitman School of Management, Syracuse University, 721 University Ave., Syracuse, NY 13244, USA. Tel: +1-315-443-3492; E-mail: [mbenaroc@syr.edu](mailto:mbenaroc@syr.edu)

Received 1 February 2021; revised 2 July 2021; accepted 16 August 2021

## **Abstract**

Growing reliance on third-party services, such as cloud computing, is believed to increase client firms' exposure to third-party induced cyber incidents. However, we lack empirical research on the prevalence and scale of third-party induced cyber incidents. Moreover, we do not know who pays more of the price for experiencing these incidents—the client firm and/or the third-party provider firm. We study these questions using a sample of 1397 cyber incidents in public firms between 2000 and 2020 of which 246 are third-party induced incidents. Our findings offer several novel insights. Third-party induced cyber incidents are not growing in prevalence any faster than other incidents, but they do compromise greater volumes of confidential data per incident. As to the price paid for third-party induced incidents, the picture is more nuanced. Client (first-party) firms suffer drops in equity returns that are comparable to those for homegrown incidents, while small third-party provider firms suffer significantly larger drops in equity returns and large third-party provider firms do not suffer a discernible drop in equity returns. We discuss implications of these findings for client firms and service providers.

**Key words:** third-party induced cyber incident, cyber incident, client firm, service provider firm, event study, survival analysis

## **Introduction**

[journals.permissions@oup.com](mailto:journals.permissions@oup.com)

Regular reports of third-party induced cyber incidents are increasing the perception that third-party service providers became a major source of cybersecurity risk [\[1–5\]](#page-14-0). A "third-party induced cyber incident" occurs when a third-party service provider is the source of vulnerability at the root of the incident. Recent examples are Salesforce's multi-hour cloud meltdown due to a database blunder that granted users access to all data (May 2019); CapitalOne's data breach due to a former Amazon Cloud Services employee who hacked over 100 million customers' data hosted on Amazon's cloud (July 2019); and Google's cloud outage that took down YouTube, Gmail, and Snapchat in parts of the United States (June 2019). Other high-profile third-party breaches were attributable to access gained from a company's service provider, including Equifax, Target Corp., Home Depot, several large hotel chains, Barclays, AT&T, and Goodwill, among others.

The concern over third-party induced cyber incidents is here to stay [\[1,](#page-14-0) [6\]](#page-14-1).1 Reliance on IT outsourcing, software as a service (SAAS), and other cloud computing services is growing steadily. In parallel, service providers' IT platforms are growing in complexity without being subject to adequate vetting of their security controls [\[7\]](#page-14-2). This exacerbates client firms' cybersecurity risk exposure [\[2\]](#page-14-3). Client firms may assume that third-party service providers are taking on the responsibility for cybersecurity risk but their liability and regulatory responsibility for this risk is in fact nontransferable.

Despite this reality, lack of empirical research on third-party induced cyber incidents leaves us with three fundamental gaps. One gap is the lack of fact-based evidence on the prevalence of third-

<sup>C</sup> The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 1 Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs licence [\(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/\)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial reproduction and distribution of the work,

in any medium, provided the original work is not altered or transformed in any way, and that the work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact

<sup>1</sup> IBM [\[6\]](#page-14-1), e.g. reports that third-party vulnerabilities represent the second costliest root cause of malicious cyber incidents (on average, \$4.5 million per incident).

party induced cyber incidents. One practitioner study finds that 56% of surveyed firms experienced a data breach caused by their vendors [\[5\]](#page-14-4), and another study reports that four in five firms have suffered a cybersecurity breach caused by a third-party [\[1\]](#page-14-0). Academic studies suggest a number closer to one-third for financial services [\[8\]](#page-14-5) and the healthcare industry [\[9\]](#page-14-6). By another account, only 13% of all cyber insurance claims in 2016 are caused by third-party providers [\[10\]](#page-14-7). Another gap is the lack of fact-based evidence on the scale of thirdparty induced incidents. Highly visible third-party induced incidents involve massive amounts of compromised data. Target's 2013 incident exposed 40 million credit and debit card accounts, Home Depot's 2014 breach exposed 56 million payment card accounts, and Equifax's 2017 breach compromised personal data of 143 million consumers. We do not know whether typical third-party induced cyber incidents compromise data on the same scale. The third gap is non-clarity on who pays more of the price for experiencing thirdparty induced incidents? The blame for third-party induced incidents often goes to both parties, as seen in the following example.

In the 2013 Target breach, hackers gained access to Target's network using credentials stolen from a third-party HVAC vendor [\[11\]](#page-14-8). The vendor maintained a connection to the Target network for electronic billing, contract submission, and project management. Target was not a bystander, however. Target failed to apply and manage proper access controls, the segregation of systems, the risk associated with third-party services.

Client firms have their reputation on the line since they are still liable for the security of their data and systems. The law simply does not allow firms to transfer their regulatory responsibility to third parties [\[12\]](#page-14-9). Consequently, the stock market is likely to inflict a penalty on public client firms. At the same time, when the blame for an incident goes almost entirely to the third party, one would expect the stock market to inflict a greater penalty on the third-party firm. Service providers have their reputation to worry about as well, especially when their business offerings are IT based at their core. However, could the sheer size and diversity of business offerings of some service providers, such as Wipro and Microsoft, shield them from stock market penalties? And, if so, what does it mean for the first-party firms involved? Lack of answers to these questions not only holds back the field's ability to theorize about these cyber incidents and what makes them different and critical but also prevents us from offering manager's valid guidance on why and how to manage risk due to the prospect of third-party induced cyber incidents.

This paper addresses the above three gaps using a large sample of 1397 cyber incidents in public firms between 2000 and 2020. The sample is split into a subsample of 246 third-party induced cyber incidents with 119 identified third-party firms and a subsample of 1032 other incidents. To address the first two gaps, which concern the prevalence and scale of third-party induced cyber incidents, we use univariate analysis and multivariate survival analysis with both subsamples. We find that, while third-party induced incidents are not growing in prevalence faster than other incidents, they do tend to compromise larger amounts of confidential data. To study the third gap, which concerns the price paid for experiencing third-party induced cyber incidents, we use the event study methodology to compute post-incident abnormal stock returns of the party firms involved. We use univariate and multivariate analysis to compare abnormal returns for several subsamples. We find that small third-party incident firms suffer significantly larger drops in equity returns. By contrast, large third-party incident firms do not suffer a discernible drop in equity returns, and first-party firms suffer a comparable drop in equity returns to that of firms experiencing other (homegrown) incidents.

<span id="page-1-0"></span>**Figure 1:** Prevalence of cyber incidents based on two large studies.

We will discuss implications of these findings for both client firms and third-party service provider firms.

The paper proceeds as follows. The section "Background on Cybersecurity Incidents" offers background on the prevalence and economic impact of cyber incidents of all kinds. The section "Third-Party Induced Cyber Incidents—Hypothesis Development" develops four research hypotheses. The section "Data and Analysis" describes the data and research design for testing the hypotheses. The section "Analysis Results" presents our analysis results. The section "Discussion and Implications" discusses the main results, limitations, and implications.

## **Background on Cybersecurity Incidents**

### Prevalence of cyber incidents

Reports on cyber incidents have been growing steadily since the early 1990s. This is substantiated by recent studies of large data samples. Richardson *et al.* [\[13\]](#page-14-10) document a steady growth rate in cyber incidents between 2005 and 2017, based on a combined sample of 827 breach disclosures from *privacyrights.org* and *Audit Analytics*. Their sample suggests an average annual growth rate of ∼40% (see Fig. [1\). Hogan \[14\] uses a sample of 3600 cyber breaches between 1990](#page-1-0) and 2019, based on data from *Advisen Ltd's Standard Loss Feed Data*. While we are not aware of other studies that use this data set and hence are not familiar with the exact types of incidents it encompasses, the growth pattern suggests an average annual growth rate of ∼300%; in fact, up until 2016 the growth pattern resembles a quadratic rate (see [Fig. 1\)](#page-1-0). These two large samples show an unequivocal growth trend in the prevalence of cyber incidents. We are not aware of comparable data on third-party induced cyber incidents.

### Market-based economic impact of cyber incidents

Research has been using a variety of measures of impact. Many measures such as direct costs, lawsuits costs, and lost sales are limited because they are hard to quantify for the different types of cyber incidents firms are experiencing [\[15\]](#page-14-12). A more common measure is change in stock returns. While this measure applies only to publicly traded companies, its versatility captures the collective wisdom of shareholders' view of how a cyber incident is likely to affect a firm. Finance theory suggests that stock prices are forward looking and reflect all available information and expectations about the present and future earnings of firms [\[16\]](#page-14-13). Accordingly, post-incident stock prices should reflect all new information about a cyber incident and the firm experiencing it. Since cyber incidents are adverse events, cyber incident firms are expected to see a drop in their equity returns that subsumes all expected costs of a cyber incident (e.g. cost of inefficiencies, loss due to business down time, cost of care to customer whose data was breached, and possible class action lawsuits). The drop in equity returns is commonly measured as the difference between equity returns expected if a cyber incident did not occur (normal returns) and the actual returns observed after a cyber incident has occurred. The difference is normally measured on a day-to-day basis, termed daily abnormal return (AR). When daily ARs are accumulated over a period of multiple days, the sum is termed the cumulative AR (CAR) for that period.

Tenths of studies report that breached firms suffer a drop in equity returns, measured as a negative CAR. [Table 1](#page-3-0) offers a representative sample; see Richardson *et al.* [\[13\]](#page-14-10) for a more comprehensive summary. Some studies find no drop in equity returns for cyber incidents in their samples [\[17–19\]](#page-14-14), while many more studies demonstrate that cyber incidents on average lead to a drop in firm equity returns (e.g. [\[20–25\]](#page-14-15)). Some studies examine post-failure drops in firm equity returns relative to incident attributes, e.g. the volume of compromised data (e.g. [\[26,](#page-15-0) [27\]](#page-15-1)), the type of compromised data (Kamiya et al. 2021 [\[28\]](#page-15-2)), and whether the incident is accidental or malicious (e.g. [\[29,](#page-15-3) [30,](#page-15-4) [19,](#page-14-16) [31\]](#page-15-5)). Other studies examine post-failure drops in equity returns in relation to firm attributes, including firm industry, firm size, age, and growth rate (e.g. [\[20,](#page-14-15) [32,](#page-15-6) [21\]](#page-14-17)).

While this body of research offers fairly strong support for the idea that cyber incidents negatively impact firms' share prices, no comparable studies exist on third-party induced incidents. There are a few studies that focus on how information security certification benefits third-party service providers. These studies demonstrate that third-party service providers that invest in certifications, such as ISO27002, see their stock prices appreciate [\[33–37\]](#page-15-7). Hence, shareholders ascribe (positive) value to certified IT service providers. However, we do not know how shareholders respond when service providers are the cause of or primary contributor to third-party induced cyber incidents.

## **Third-Party Induced Cyber Incidents—Hypothesis Development**

This section develops our research hypotheses about the prevalence and scale of third-party induced incidents as well as about how these incidents affect the equity returns of parties involved.

## Prevalence and scale

The perception that the prevalence and scale of third-party induced cyber incidents have been growing is anchored in two factors. One is a steady growth in reliance on IT outsourcing, SAAS, and other cloud computing services. The popularity and continued growth of thirdparty services are attributed to their ability to help organizations be more agile and cost effective [\[3\]](#page-14-18). A good example is the range of benefits cloud computing is promising to offer client firms, including scalability, mobility, cost effectiveness, data security, disaster recovery, and control. However, the cybersecurity concerns associated with reliance on third-party services have been escalating and taking on a more urgent priority [\[1,](#page-14-0) [2,](#page-14-3) [5\]](#page-14-4). Every firm is subject to cybersecurity risk. Reliance on third-party service providers exacerbates this risk because of a combination of client firms' "openness to connect" and service providers' "connection opaqueness."

For client firms, connections with third-party service providers are pervasive and unavoidable. Most organizations allow some type of third-party access to their networks to enable a required service. In fact, third parties are often treated as quasi-insiders (Bryant 2016 [\[38\]](#page-15-8)). They enjoy a level of trust that can meet or exceed that of insider trust simply based upon personal interactions and longevity in the relationships (Kansteiner 2016 [\[39\]](#page-15-9)). This level of trust and access to networks can provide an easier attack vector for malicious entities (Goldstein 2015 [\[40\]](#page-15-10)). In particular, smaller third parties providing services to client organizations are less protected and may represent relatively easy targets to penetrate (Kroll 2014 [\[41\]](#page-15-11)).

What makes things worse is the limited ability of client firms to verify that their trust in third parties' IT platforms is not misplaced [\(42,](#page-15-12) [43,](#page-15-13) [44\)](#page-15-14). Client firms have little visibility into their service providers' operations and supply chain partners [\[7,](#page-14-2) [45\]](#page-15-15). Service providers' IT platforms are becoming increasingly complex, escalating the risk for cyber incidents. More importantly, third-party service providers are players in increasingly complex, dynamic, and nontransparent supply chains. A good example is cloud computing, an ecosystem with many more points of access and higher potential for cybersecurity failures. Because data in a cloud could be scattered across multiple data centers and managed by multiple third-party sub-suppliers, it is difficult, if not impossible, for client firms to have visibility into their service providers' and their own sub-providers' internal processes, geographic locations, and regulatory compliance implications [\[46\]](#page-15-16).2 And, even if client firms were to have such visibility, most are neither technically capable nor economically desiring of the burden of auditing their service providers' and sub-providers' IT platforms [\[3\]](#page-14-18). At the same time, service providers are neither fully aware of their supply chain partners beyond the first tier nor clear on how much technical information they could share with their client firms [\[7\]](#page-14-2).

This state of affairs, due to the growth in reliance on thirdparty services and the combination of "client openness" and "partner opaqueness," means greater cybersecurity risk exposure. The growing complexity of service providers' IT platforms and client firms' inability to audit those IT platforms suggest that the prevalence of third-party induced cyber incidents has been and would continue growing. And, because of the growing volumes of data client firms have been entrusting with their third-party service providers, there is reason to expect that the scale of data exposed by third-party induced cyber incidents has been and would continue growing. On this basis, we hypothesize that:

## **Hypothesis 1a:**

Third-party induced incidents are increasing in prevalence compared to other cyber incidents.

<sup>2</sup> Aknirolabu and New [\[7\]](#page-14-2) evaluated the transparency of 25 top cloud service providers (CSPs) based on their published information, finding that most have very limited visibility into their operations and supply chains. They compared 25 CSPs on eight transparency features (architecture, technology/partners, datacenter location, security features, IT-related compliance certifications, advertised SLA, disaster recovery & business continuity, and monitoring & support). The results show that (i) CSPs in vertical markets, such as the finance/ERP subgroup, scored the lowest points; and (ii) CSPs in the online workspace subgroup were found to be the most transparent.

<span id="page-3-0"></span>

| Study                                 | Sample period  | No. of events | Type of events                                                                                   | Key findings (Mean CARs %, [event window])                                                                         | % Firms with neg. CARs |
|---------------------------------------|----------------|---------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------|
| Campbell et al. [29]                  | 1995–2000      | 43            | worms, 4 website defacing attacks, 4<br>11 data breaches, 8 DOS attacks, 10<br>viruses; 6 others | (−5.4%, [−1,+1]) for breaches of confidential<br>data (−1.9%, [−1,+1]) for all events                              | ∼50%                   |
| Hovav and D'Arcy [18]                 | 1998–2002      | 23            | DOS attacks                                                                                      | No negative mean CARs for DOS attacks, except                                                                      | ∼40%                   |
| Garg et al. [22]                      | 1996–2002      | 22            | Theft of customer data and CC data,<br>website defacement, DOS attacks                           | (−5.6%,[0,+2]) excluding virus attacks<br>for internet companies                                                   | 68%                    |
| Hovav and D'Arcy [47]                 | 1988–2002      | 186           | 186 virus attacks                                                                                | No negative mean CARs                                                                                              |                        |
| Cavusoglu et al. [21]                 | 1996–2001      | 66            | 32 data security breaches, 34 DOS<br>attacks                                                     | (−2.1%, [0,+1]), lower CARs for Internet and<br>small firms                                                        | ∼40%                   |
| Zhou [31]                             | 1995–2002      | 71            | 9 security breaches, 32 virus attacks, 30                                                        | (−5.02%, [−1,+1]) only to data confidentiality                                                                     | 60%                    |
| Anthony et al. [48]                   | 1999           | 86            | Website and email outages due to<br>availability problems                                        | (−3.9%, [−1,+2])<br>events                                                                                         | 67%                    |
|                                       |                |               | external and internal technical reasons                                                          |                                                                                                                    |                        |
| Acquisti et al. [20]                  | 2000–2005      | 79            | Bad security practices (24), hacker (9),<br>insider attack (8), lost data (12), other            | (−0.58%, [0,+1]), lower CARs for retail and<br>smaller firms                                                       | 56%                    |
| Aytes et al. [17]                     | 1995–2005      | 67            | Security breaches, 31 confidential, 36<br>(26)                                                   | (−1.85%,[−1,+2]) only for                                                                                          |                        |
|                                       |                |               | nonconfidential                                                                                  | confidentiality-related events                                                                                     |                        |
| Telang and Wattel [25]                | 1999–2004      | 147           | Vulnerabilities of vendor-provided<br>software (∼45% from Microsoft)                             | (−0.63%, [0,+1]) for software vendors                                                                              | 58–64%                 |
| Kannan et al. [19]                    | 1997–2003      | 72            | 12 data breaches, 39 viruses, 11 website<br>defacing attacks, 4 DOS attacks, 6                   | No negative CARs for all events, except when<br>incidents from "9/11" month are included in                        | NA                     |
|                                       |                |               | website outages                                                                                  | sample                                                                                                             |                        |
| Leung and Bose [49]                   | 2007 and Prior | 2 994         | 2994 phishing attacks                                                                            | countries and certain industries (e.g. financial and<br>(−5.1%, [−1,+1]) for firms in developed<br>IT and telecom) | NA                     |
| Tanimura and Wehrly                   | 2000–2007      | 152           | 145 data theft, 7 data loss                                                                      | (−0.2% to −1.0%), lower CARs for loss of                                                                           |                        |
| Wang (2009)<br>[27]                   | 1997–2007      | 88            | Data breaches Virus and other attacks                                                            | employee data than customer data<br>No negative CARs detected                                                      |                        |
| Bolster et al. [32]                   | 2000–2007      | 93            | Data breaches                                                                                    | Negative CARs if incidents are disclosed in                                                                        |                        |
| Gatzlaff et al. (2010)                | 2005–2006      | 77            | Breaches of customer and employee                                                                | (−0.84%, [0,+1]) and (−1.1%. [0,+30])<br>certain outlets and not others                                            | 55–65%                 |
|                                       |                |               | data                                                                                             |                                                                                                                    |                        |
| Gordon (2011)                         | 1995–2007      | 121           | Confidentiality events (39), availability                                                        | (−1.2%, [−1,+1]) for availability incidents                                                                        | NA                     |
| Morse et al. [50]                     | 2000–2010      | 306           | Security breaches: stolen laptops,<br>events (70), integrity events (12)                         | (−4.08%, [+1,+220]) and (−8.68% [+1,+440]);<br>(−0.9%, [−1,+1]) for all incidents                                  | 51% 56%                |
|                                       |                |               | fraudulent access, hacking                                                                       | lower CARs for controllable breaches                                                                               |                        |
| Goldstein et al. [30]                 | 1985–2012      | 142           | 67 data events, 75 function events                                                               | (−1.48%,[−1,+2]) for function events, not<br>(−0.75%,[−1,+2]) for all incidents,                                   | 55%                    |
|                                       |                |               |                                                                                                  | significant CARs for data events                                                                                   |                        |
| Benaroch et al. [51]                  | 1995–2010      | 142           | 57 confidentiality events, 62 integrity<br>events, 23 availability events                        | and integrity events, not for confidentiality events<br>(−2.43% to −0.72% [−1,+2]) for availability                | ∼60%                   |
| Hsieh et al. [52]<br>Hinz et al. [53] |                | 103<br>6      | Data loss incidents<br>Data theft                                                                | Mean CARs practically zero (+/−0.02%)<br>(−1.16%) for directly affected firms                                      | NA<br>NA               |
|                                       |                |               |                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                    |                        |

| Table 1: Continued                           |                   |               |                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                            |                        |
|----------------------------------------------|-------------------|---------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------|
| Study                                        | Sample period     | No. of events | Type of events                                                                                                                                                 | Mean CARs %, [event window])<br>Key findings (                                                                                                             | % Firms with neg. CARs |
| Dane [26]                                    |                   | 1023          | (388; stolen drive), logical (499; virus,<br>Data breaches (n; example): physical<br>hack), procedural (136; disposal)                                         | −0.65% difference between mean index price<br>change and mean stock price change                                                                           |                        |
| Arcuri et al. [55]<br>Jeong et al. [54]      | 1995–2015         | 226<br>83     | Cyber attacks: confidential,<br>Security breaches                                                                                                              | −1.2%<br>+10] and (<br>−10,<br>−3.3%,[<br>+2])<br>−2,<br>−0.6%, [<br>Between (<br>(                                                                        | 55–60%<br>NA           |
|                                              |                   |               | nonconfidential (virus, DOS attacks,<br>etc.); some nonconfidential cyber<br>attacks are DOS attacks                                                           | +3]), more negative CARs for financial firms<br>[−3,                                                                                                       |                        |
| Lange and Burger [57]<br>Johnson et al. [56] | 2005–2014<br>2005 | 467<br>64     | Data breaches<br>Data breaches                                                                                                                                 | Negative difference in stock price between<br>attached firms and peers, but difference<br>−0.37%, 3-day windows)<br>disappears by day 14<br>(              | 56%                    |
| Corbet and Gurdgiev<br>[58]                  | 2005–2014         | 819           | release; external data breach or hack, a<br>lost, stolen or discarded internal data<br>device; an unintentional disclosure<br>Data breaches due to an employee | −5%) in 2010–2014, and<br>(−3%) in 2005–2008, (<br>(−10%) in 2014–2015                                                                                     |                        |
| Bischoff [59]                                | 2007–2017         | 24            | data breaches, including some of the<br>largest in history                                                                                                     | (−0.43%) in the short run; avg. stock returns rise<br>14.8% is 3 years pre vs 3 years post, respectively)<br>slower in three years post-incident (45.6% vs |                        |

Third-party induced incidents are increasing in scale of data exposed compared to other cyber incidents.

## Accountability and stock market reaction

Another question is: who is held accountable for third-party induced cyber incidents, the client (first-party) firm and/or the service provider (third-party) firm? To address this question, we adopt a market-based view of how cyber incidents impact the market value of public firms. As we said in the section "Background on Cybersecurity Incidents," based on the efficient market hypothesis, the economic harm of cyber incidents on publicly traded firms is measurable because all new information shareholders care about is instantly incorporated into stock prices.

For cyber incidents in general, the information shareholders care about pertains to direct and indirect costs that would affect a firm's current and future earnings. One source of cost is due to post-incident inefficiencies in business operations that inhibit a firm's best potential performance with its current IT resource endowment [\[60–62\]](#page-15-31). Another is loss of business during IT systems and business processes downtime, damage to firm reputation and customer trust, recovery and customer care costs, and potential class action lawsuits [\[30,](#page-15-4) [28,](#page-15-2) [12,](#page-14-9) [63\]](#page-15-32). In this light, since stock prices are forward looking and reflect the expected earnings of a firm, when the firm suffers an unexpected cyber incident all information about the incident's expected costs would be instantly incorporated into the firm's stock price, in which case the firm would see a drop in its stock returns. In sum, shareholders "penalize" firms that suffer cyber incidents by adjusting their equity returns downward. This expectation has been validated by many of the studies reviewed in the section "Prevalence of cyber incidents."

For third-party induced incidents, which involve a client firm and a service provider, we expect both parties to suffer a shareholder penalty. We particularly expect small third-party service providers to suffer a greater shareholder penalty. We next develop the rationale for these expectations.

Client firms would see a drop in equity returns due to the same reasons discussed above and, in addition, due to present laws and regulations. First, according to US state laws, first-party firms have the duty of disclosure/notification, whereas service providers are merely required to notify their client firms of an incident [\[12\]](#page-14-9). Hence, even if it is a service provider's system that was breached, client firms are the ones required to inform customers and employees of the breach. As the "bearer of bad news," client firms are expected to get more of the shareholder penalty blunt:

"Bad news messages and events tend to remain salient in our memories more than good news messages … For this reason consumers may harshly judge organizations that alert them to a breach." ([\[64\]](#page-15-33), p. 340)

Indeed, there is evidence that shareholders respond more negatively when disclosure comes from a breached firm than from other sources [\[65\]](#page-15-34). Second, according to the law, client firms are more accountable to shareholders [\[12\]](#page-14-9). Roughly half of the states in the United States legally require businesses to implement "reasonable procedures and practices" to prevent and respond to cyber incidents. Some states also hold client firms responsible for vetting service providers' security controls and even for contractually enforcing cybersecurity measures. Third, client firms bare the primary liability for incidents compromising customer data and regulatory mandates, even when incidents are beyond their capability to detect or prevent [\[12\]](#page-14-9). For example, in 2018, a physician group settled a HIPAA en-

### <span id="page-5-0"></span>**Table 2:** Construction of the sample of cyber incidents

|                       |                                        | All incidents                                          |                         |                      |                      |
|-----------------------|----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|----------------------|----------------------|
|                       |                                        | In public firms, with clear incident                   |                         | Of which:            |                      |
|                       | Raw incidents                          | date and Compustat/CRSP data                           | Non 3rd-party Incidents | 3rd-party incidents  |                      |
|                       |                                        |                                                        |                         | 1st party identified | 3rd party identified |
| Veriz                 | 8009                                   | 385                                                    | 300                     | 54                   | 31                   |
| PRC                   | 9362                                   | 846                                                    | 676                     | 112                  | 58                   |
| AlgoFirst             | 838                                    | 465                                                    | 351                     | 100                  | 14                   |
| Wikipedia             | 521                                    | 119                                                    | 50                      | 52                   | 17                   |
| Total                 | 18 730                                 | 1787                                                   |                         |                      |                      |
| Total Less Duplicates |                                        | 1397                                                   | 1032                    | 246                  | 119                  |
|                       | (a) count of cyber incidents by source |                                                        |                         |                      |                      |
|                       |                                        |                                                        |                         |                      | 3rd-party incidents  |
| SIC1                  |                                        |                                                        | Non 3rd-party incidents | First                | Third                |
| 2                     | Manufacturing                          |                                                        | 48                      | 5                    | 1                    |
| 3                     | Technology and Life Sciences           |                                                        | 167                     | 16                   | 13                   |
| 4                     |                                        | Transportation & Public Utilities                      | 142                     | 16                   | 12                   |
| 5                     | Wholesale Trade & Retail               |                                                        | 154                     | 18                   | 15                   |
| 6                     |                                        | Finance, Insurance, & Real Estate                      | 594                     | 116                  | 33                   |
| 7                     | Business Services                      |                                                        | 263                     | 52                   | 30                   |
| 8                     |                                        | Other Services (health, engineering, management, etc.) | 56                      | 5                    | 6                    |
|                       | others                                 |                                                        | 8                       | 18                   | 9                    |
|                       | Total Less Duplicates                  |                                                        | 1032                    | 246                  | 119                  |
|                       | (b) breakdown by one-digit SIC code    |                                                        |                         |                      |                      |

forcement action even though it was a service provider's website that exposed patient billing data [\[66\]](#page-15-35). Other forms of liability arise due to aggrieved litigants, class action lawsuits, and regulatory investigations [\[12\]](#page-14-9). Fourth, client firms cannot transfer their risk exposure using cybersecurity liability insurance [\[67\]](#page-15-36). Cybersecurity liability insurance is known to impose restrictive exclusions and conditions. Typically, coverage limits are around \$25 million and below \$300 million even for the largest firms [\[68\]](#page-15-37). This challenge is exacerbated when there is no clear delineation of where service providers' liability starts and ends. On this basis of these four reasons, we formulate the next hypothesis:

## **Hypothesis 2a**

**(H2a):** Client firms involved in third-party induced cyber incidents experience a greater drop in equity returns than other cyber incident firms.

Third-party service providers, too, have reasons to expect a drop in their equity returns. First, third parties' business and IT reputation may be at risk. The reliability of their IT platforms and ITbased services is at the core to their business offerings. Third-party induced cyber incidents can put this reliability in question, thus discouraging existing clients from continuing and prospective clients from starting a relationship with a service provider. Second, third parties could also be subject to class act lawsuits. While not common, class action lawsuits against third parties can be fatal. For example, Blackbaud, a US-based cloud computing service provider to a variety of educational, religious, and healthcare organizations is facing class action lawsuits concerning a ransomware attack that breached some clients' sensitive information [\[69\]](#page-15-38). Moreover, service providers could be sued by client firms that suffer cybersecurity related injury or financial loss [\[70\]](#page-16-0). Third, although it is the client firms that more often end up embroiled in regulatory enforcement actions, various regulators do bring actions against third party service providers, e.g. financial services companies [\[12\]](#page-14-9). For these reasons, our next hypothesis is:

## **Hypothesis 2b**

**(H2b)**: Service providers involved in third-party induced cyber incidents experience a greater drop in equity returns than other cyber incident firms.

We qualify the last hypothesis and expect that small third-party service providers would experience a greater drop in firm equity returns. It is difficult to imagine that large and high-valued service provider firms would experience a discernable drop in their stock prices. For example, take the case of large IT vendors such as Oracle Corp., Symantec Corp., and Wipro Ltd, as well as cloud service providers such as Amazon.com and Microsoft. Their sheer size and diversified business offerings make it less likely that their involvement in a third-party induced cyber incident would bring down their stock prices enough to observe a drop in their equity returns. Studies show that the drop in equity returns following cyber incidents is inversely related to firm size [\[20,](#page-14-15) [51,](#page-15-22) [21,](#page-14-17) [19\]](#page-14-16). By contrast, because smaller third-party firms tend to have narrow and highly specialized service offerings, even a single cyber incident could have a significant effect on their equity returns. Shareholders are likely to envision an adverse effect on the engagement level of small service providers' current and prospective client firms. In this light, our next hypothesis is:

## **Hypothesis 2c**

**(H2c):** Small service providers involved in third-party induced incident experience a greater drop in equity returns than large service providers.

## **Data and Analysis**

This section presents the data and research methods used to test our research hypotheses. It also defines the study variables and provides descriptive statistics.

### <span id="page-6-0"></span>**Table 3:** Variables and their definitions

| Variable                  | Definition                                                                                                                       | Data source                   |
|---------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| Dependent variables       |                                                                                                                                  |                               |
| CAR[t1,t2]                | Cumulative abnormal firm equity returns over event window [t1,t2]                                                                | Event study                   |
| NoRecordsExposed          | Natural logarithm of the number of data records an incident exposed                                                              | Sample sources                |
| Firm characteristics      |                                                                                                                                  |                               |
| FirmGrowth                | Tobin's q ratio calculated as the sum of market value of equity and book value<br>of debt divided by total assets ((MVE + D)/TA) | Compustat                     |
| FirmSize                  | Natural logarithm of total firm assets measures in USD billions                                                                  | Compustat                     |
| FirmRisk                  | Standard deviation of monthly equity returns in the year prior to an IT failure                                                  | CRSP database                 |
| ROA                       | Square root of return on assets calculated by net income (before extraordinary<br>items) divided by total assets                 | Compustat                     |
| SalesGrowth               | Changes in sales from the previous year, scaled by total sale.                                                                   | Compustat                     |
| Leverage                  | Current portion of long-term debt (DLC) plus long-term debt (DLTT), scaled by<br>total assets                                    | Compustat                     |
| Loss                      | Equals 1 if net income for the fiscal year is negative and 0 otherwise                                                           |                               |
| Foreign                   | Equals 1 if the firm reports foreign operations and 0 otherwise.                                                                 | Compustat                     |
| IT_Intensity              | Binary indicator if a firm is on the annual IW500 IT leaders list                                                                | InformationWeeks' IW500 index |
| Cyber incident attributes |                                                                                                                                  |                               |
| D_ThirdPartyIncident      | Indicator of a firm involved in a third-party induced incident                                                                   | Coded by authors              |
| D_First                   | Indicator of a client firm in a 3rd-party induced incident                                                                       | — "—-                         |
| D_Third                   | Indicator of a third-party firm in a 3rd-party induced incident                                                                  | — "—-                         |
| D_Internal                | Indicator of the source, internal (1) or external (0), of an incident                                                            | — "—-                         |
| D_Malicious               | Indicator of the intent, malicious (1) or accidental (0), of an incident                                                         | — "—-                         |

## Data sample

Our sample of cyber incidents and its sources are summarized in [Table 2a](#page-5-0). We started with a set of cyber incidents that occurred in public firms between 2000 and 2020. The set is extracted from Verizon's VERIS data breaches database, Privacy Rights Clearinghouse (PRC) repository, IBM's AlgoFirst database of operational risk events, and Wikipedia entry on data breaches. VERIS and PRC are used by many studies for their relative comprehensiveness. We include AlgoFirst and Wikipedia for their coverage of relatively large cyber incidents in publicly traded firms.3 We excluded incidents with no exact "announcement" date and in firms with missing stock data in the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) or company data in Compustat. After removing duplicates, we obtain a final sample of 1397 cyber incidents. This sample is among the largest studied to date. [Table 2b](#page-5-0) shows that our sample covers incidents from a variety of industry sectors, based on a classification of the cyber incident firms by their one-digit SIC code.

Within the 1397 incidents we identified 246 third-party induced incidents [\(Table 2a](#page-5-0)). The identification was done as follows. PRC lists the main parties involved in an incident. VERIS has a field (Actor.Partner) indicating when a data breach involves a business partner. For IBM's AlgoFirst database and Wikipedia's data breaches, we uploaded the text summarizing each incident into Excel and searched those against over 35 key words, including ones likely to

identify when a third-party is involved.4 All 246 third-party induced cyber incidents identify a first-party firm but only 119 of them identify a publicly traded third-party service provider firm.

## Research design **Frequency of third-party events**

To test hypotheses H1a, which concerns the prevalence of third-party induced cyber incidents, we use survival analysis (SA). SA is a dynamic statistical technique for analyzing the time till the occurrence of a certain "failure" event occurs, or a cyber incident in our case [\[71\]](#page-16-1). Regression-based estimation of SA models assumes a relationship between the hazard (or failure risk) function and a set of explanatory variables (*X*). Due to its flexibility, a prominent SA model is the semi-parametric Proportional Hazard model:

$$
h(t) = g\left(t, X^{T}\right) = h_{0}(t) \cdot \exp\left(\beta X^{T} + c\right), \qquad (1)
$$

where *h*0(*t*) is a baseline (nonparametric) hazard function describing how hazard changes over time, exp(β*X*<sup>T</sup> <sup>+</sup> *<sup>c</sup>*) is a parametric hazard function where β is a set of estimated regression coefficients, *X* is a set of explanatory variables, *X*<sup>T</sup> is the transpose of *X*, and *c* is an estimated constant. The explanatory variables we use in model are firm characteristics from the year before a cyber incident occurs and cyber incident characteristics (all defined in [Table 3\)](#page-6-0). The firm characteristics are size measured by total liabilities (**FirmSize**), risk measured by the variability of stock returns (**FirmRisk**), performance measures (**ROA**, **Loss**, and **Leverage**), complexity of operational structure (**Foreign**), sales growth rate (**Growth**), and IT intensity dummy (**IWb**). The remaining variables are a cyber incident dummy (**D\_Incident**) and a third-party incident dummy (**D\_ThirdPartyIncident**). Model

<sup>3</sup> To clarify this point, consider a brief comparison of AlgoFirst and VERIS. IBM's AlgoFirst is a commercial database compiling public information on operational risk events of all kinds and bibliographic sources (firm news releases, Wall Street Journal, Reuters, newswire, court filings, etc.). Since inception in 1992, by 2020 AlgoFirst documented over 15 000 operational risk events, of which ∼465 are cyber incidents in public firms. By contrast, VERIS coverage starts in 2001 and 98% of its data breaches are from after 2012. Moreover, 80% of the 2010–2018 cyber incidents in our AlgoFirst sample are missing in VERIS, and the bulk of the 2010–2018 breaches in VERIS not found in our AlgoFirst subsample occurred in privately held companies.

<sup>4</sup> The key words are: data, computer, electronic, information, system, technical, security, software, heck, phishing, access, code, password, hacker, network, transaction, error, integrity, outage, volume, internet, interrupt, breach, cyber, virus, attack, glitch, steal/stole, confidential, process, email, private, outsource/ing, third party, third-party, 3rd party, vendor, service provider, and business partner.

| Table 4: Pairwise correlations   |      |       |           |       |        |         |         |         |         |         |         |        |       |         |         |         |         |         |      |      |
|----------------------------------|------|-------|-----------|-------|--------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|--------|-------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|------|------|
| Variables                        | Obs  | Mean  | Std. Dev. | Min.  | Max.   | (1)     | (2)     | (3)     | (4)     | (5)     | (6)     | (7)    | (8)   | (9)     | (10)    | (11)    | (12)    | (13)    | (14) | (15) |
| (1) CAR[−1,5]                    | 1397 | 0     | .05       | −0.63 | .43    | 1.00    |         |         |         |         |         |        |       |         |         |         |         |         |      |      |
| (2) NoRecordsExposed             | 828  | 9.35  | 4.4       | 0     | 21.82  | 0.00    | 1.00    |         |         |         |         |        |       |         |         |         |         |         |      |      |
| (3) FirmGrowth                   | 1397 | 1.43  | 4.74      | −0.06 | 117.65 | 0.02    | 0.03    | 1.00    |         |         |         |        |       |         |         |         |         |         |      |      |
| (4) FirmSize                     | 1176 | 10.08 | 2.66      | −1.3  | 15.09  | 0.03    | − 0.02  | − 0.03∗ | 1.00    |         |         |        |       |         |         |         |         |         |      |      |
| (5) ROA                          | 1397 | .2    | .12       | .01   | 1.46   | − 0.04  | − 0.01  | 0.16∗   | − 0.17∗ | 1.00    |         |        |       |         |         |         |         |         |      |      |
| (6) FirmRisk                     | 1351 | .09   | .05       | 0     | .56    | − 0.06∗ | 0.02    | 0.01∗   | − 0.34∗ | 0.02∗   | 1.00    |        |       |         |         |         |         |         |      |      |
| (7) SalesGrowth                  | 1397 | .04   | .21       | −2.74 | 1      | 0.00    | − 0.01  | 0.00    | 0.01∗   | − 0.04∗ | − 0.03∗ | 1.00   |       |         |         |         |         |         |      |      |
| (8) Leverage                     | 1397 | .96   | 1.59      | 0     | 57.93  | 0.03    | − 0.08∗ | 0.58∗   | − 0.02∗ | 0.22∗   | − 0.01  | 0.00   | 1.00  |         |         |         |         |         |      |      |
| (9) Loss                         | 1397 | .14   | .35       | 0     | 1      | 0.00    | − 0.02  | 0.02∗   | − 0.44∗ | 0.12    | 0.35∗   | 0.00   | 0.03∗ | 1.00    |         |         |         |         |      |      |
| (10) IT_Intensity                | 1397 | .24   | .43       | 0     | 1      | − 0.01  | 0.02    | 0.00    | − 0.12∗ | 0.00    | 0.05∗   | 0.00   | 0.00  | 0.05∗   | 1.00    |         |         |         |      |      |
| (11) D_ThirdPartyIncident        | 1397 | .17   | .38       | 0     | 1      | − 0.04  | 0.13∗   | 0.03    | − 0.08∗ | 0.07∗   | − 0.08∗ | − 0.01 | 0.05∗ | 0.01    | − 0.09∗ | 1.00    |         |         |      |      |
| (12) D_First                     | 1397 | .11   | .31       | 0     | 1      | − 0.03  | 0.10∗   | 0.03    | − 0.01  | 0.01    | − 0.05  | 0.00   | 0.06∗ | 0.00    | − 0.03  | 0.76∗   | 1.00    |         |      |      |
| (13) D_Third                     | 1397 | .06   | .24       | 0     | 1      | − 0.02  | 0.08∗   | 0.00    | 0.03∗   | 0.00    | − 0.02∗ | 0.00   | 0.00  | − 0.01∗ | − 0.07∗ | 0.58∗   | − 0.09∗ | 1.00    |      |      |
| (14) D_Internal                  | 1397 | .16   | .37       | 0     | 1      | 0.02    | − 0.14∗ | 0.00    | 0.07∗   | 0.00    | − 0.03∗ | 0.00   | 0.00  | − 0.02∗ | − 0.05∗ | 0.02    | 0.06∗   | 0.06∗   | 1.00 |      |
| (15) D_Malicious                 | 1397 | .44   | .5        | 0     | 1      | 0.03    | 0.12∗   | 0.02    | − 0.11∗ | 0.11∗   | 0.00    | 0.01   | 0.00  | 0.01    | − 0.04  | − 0.12∗ | − 0.05∗ | − 0.13∗ | 0.03 | 1.00 |
| ∗Significance at the 0.05 level. |      |       |           |       |        |         |         |         |         |         |         |        |       |         |         |         |         |         |      |      |

<span id="page-7-1"></span>**Figure 2:** Annual number of 3rd-party induced incidents vs all other incidents.

(1) assumes that all firms come from the same population distribution. Non-cyber incident firms are recognized by treating them as censored data, which indicates that their time of "failure" is not yet known.

We use univariate analysis to test hypothesis H1b, which concerns the volume of data compromised by third-party induced incidents. Specifically, we use a t-test of the mean difference between the (logtransformed) number of data records exposed by third-party induced incidents and all other incidents.

### **Market impact and the event study methodology**

To test hypotheses H2a/b/c, which concern shareholders' penalty on equity returns, we use the event study methodology with WRDS' Event Study tool. The event study methodology estimates the abnormal equity returns associated with an unexpected event. The premise is that the market takes into account all available information in determining equity prices [\[72\]](#page-16-2). When an unexpected event brings new information and the event is value relevant, the market reaction to the event can be observed over an event window [ *t* 1 , *t* 2] that overlaps with the event revelation date, denoted day 0. We follow the convention and try various event windows starting one day before day 0 (*t*<sup>1</sup> = −1), to account for leakage of information prior to the event revelation date, and extending up to 180 days after day 0 ( *t* 2 = 180), to give stock prices time to adjust to the event.

The market reaction to an event is estimated in two steps [\[73](#page-16-3) , [72\]](#page-16-2). The first step estimates the expected (normal) stock return for firm *i* at day *t*, assuming no event has occurred. It is done using the single-index market model:

$$
R_{it} = a_i + b_i R_{mt} + e_{it},
$$

where *Rit* is the return on firm *i*'s common stock on day *t* and *Rmt* is the return on a market index on day *t*. In our study, *Rmt* is the equal-weighted return index from the CRSP database estimated over 255 trading days prior to day 0, during the period [ −271, −16]. The second step estimates the daily abnormal returns (**AR**) for firm *i* and every day in the event window:

$$
AR_{it} = R_{it} - (\hat{a}_i + \hat{b}_i R_{mt}),
$$

<span id="page-7-0"></span>where *a*ˆ and ˆ*b* are the OLS estimates from the single-index market model. Adding up the daily ARs for firm *i* over event window [ *t* 1 , *t* 2] produces the cumulative AR (**CAR**) over the window, denoted CAR *i* [ *t* 1 , *t* 2]. Averaging CAR[ *t* 1 , *t* 2] across all firms *i* in a sample produces the mean CAR[ *t* 1 , *t* 2] for the sample. Mean CAR smooths away variations in CARs across firms in the sample.

<span id="page-8-0"></span>**Figure 3:** Hazard estimate for third-party induced cyber incidents and all other incidents. ∗ThirdCase = 1 indicates a third-party induced cyber incident.

|                      | (1)       | (2)      |
|----------------------|-----------|----------|
| FirmSize             | 0.0349∗∗∗ | 0.0335∗∗ |
|                      | (2.65)    | (2.53)   |
| ROA                  | −0.802∗∗  | −0.794∗∗ |
|                      | (−2.18)   | (−2.16)  |
| Loss                 | −0.288∗∗  | −0.292∗∗ |
|                      | (−2.53)   | (−2.56)  |
| Leverage             | 0.0306    | 0.0315   |
|                      | (0.43)    | (0.44)   |
| Foreign              | −0.0528   | −0.0527  |
|                      | (−0.89)   | (−0.88)  |
| SalesGrowth          | −0.0413   | −0.0429  |
|                      | (−0.64)   | (−0.66)  |
| IT_Intensity         | 0.493∗∗∗  | 0.494∗∗∗ |
|                      | (6.30)    | (6.32)   |
| FirmRisk             | 1.653∗∗∗  | 1.632∗∗∗ |
|                      | (3.45)    | (3.39)   |
| D_ThirdPartyIncident |           | −0.0658  |
|                      |           | (−0.89)  |
| Observations         | 25 320    | 3187     |
| Log Lik.             | −7853.6   | −7853.2  |
| Chi-squared          | 63.75     | 64.56    |

<span id="page-8-1"></span>**Table 5:** Comparative hazard regressions—incident occurrence

*z* statistics in parentheses; ∗*P* < 0.1, ∗∗*P* < 0.05, ∗∗∗*P* < 0.01.

We compute CARs for event windows between [−1,0] and [−1 180]. For robustness testing we also calculate CARs using alternative market models based on the equal-weighted market index, the Fama-French 3-factor model, and the Fama-French-momentum 4-factor model [\[73,](#page-16-3) [72\]](#page-16-2). The results in all these models (not tabulated here) are comparable to those we show in the section "Adverse changes in firm equity returns."

We test hypotheses H2a/b/c in univariate and multivariate settings. CARs serve as the dependent variables, with the a priori expectation that cyber incident firms have negative CARs. The univariate analysis starts with the null hypothesis of mean CARs being positive and tests whether mean CARs are statistically different than zero and negative. The test is done for a variety of event windows and subsamples of incident firms (e.g. third-party vs all other firms, small vs large third-party firms).

The multivariate testing of H2a/b/c estimates regression models that help explain variations in individual firms' CARs. We follow the models of Hillary *et al.* (2016) [\[74\]](#page-16-4) and Kamiya *et al.* (2019) [\[28\]](#page-15-2)] for examining determinants of cyber incidents' impact on equity returns:

$$
CAR = \{D\_First/D\_Third\} + \{FirmContents\} + \{IncidentContents\} + \{OrderContents\}
$$
\n(2)

CAR is the dependent variable. The independent variables of interest are dummies *D\_First* and *D\_Third*, denoting whether the firm involved in a cyber incident is a third-party firm (involved in a thirdparty induced cyber incident), respectively. Model (2) controls for three sets of factors known to affect equity returns. *Firm Controls* include firm characteristics in financial reports published prior to an incident: size (**FirmSize**), growth potential measured by Tobin's Q (**TobQ**), risk measured by the variability of stock returns (**FirmRisk**), and profitability measured by return on assets (**ROA**). Multiple studies show that shareholders' reaction to cyber incidents is sensitive to firm size [\[20,](#page-14-15) [21,](#page-14-17) [19\]](#page-14-16), firm risk [\[51,](#page-15-22) [28\]](#page-15-2), and firm profitability and growth potential [\[28\]](#page-15-2). *Incident Controls* include incident attribute dummies, namely, incident source being internal or external **(D\_Internal**) and intent being malicious or accidental (**D\_Malicious**). Other controls include industry dummies and year. Earlier studies have noted that industry differences can affect shareholders' reaction to cyber incidents (e.g. [\[20,](#page-14-15) [49\]](#page-15-20)). We isolate the Financial and Services industries because of the high frequency of cyber incidents in these sectors (see [Table 2b](#page-5-0)).

## Variables and descriptive statistics

Table [3](#page-6-0) lists the study variables constructed based on secondary data from multiple sources. All continuous variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles, to mitigate the impact of outliers on our analysis. [Table 4](#page-7-0) shows descriptive statistics and pairwise correlations of the study variables. None of the correlations presents a problem.

## **Analysis Results**

## Prevalence of third-party induced incidents

As explained in the section "Frequency of third-party events," to test hypothesis H1a, which concerns the prevalence of third-party induced cyber incidents, we use survival analysis (SA) to examine the hazard of experiencing such an incident as compared with the hazard of other cyber incidents. We start with [Fig. 2](#page-7-1) graphing the annual count of incidents experienced between 2000 and 2020. It shows that third-party induced cyber incidents account for only a small fraction of all incidents. In addition, it shows that third-party induced inci-

<span id="page-9-0"></span>**Table 6:** Comparative analysis of number of data records compromised per incident

|               | Log(No. of records compromised) |                 |            |         |         |
|---------------|---------------------------------|-----------------|------------|---------|---------|
| Incident type | Third-party incidents           | Other incidents | Difference | t-value | P-value |
| N             | 144                             | 683             |            |         |         |
| min           | 2.56                            | 1.2             |            |         |         |
| p25           | 7.76                            | 6.26            |            |         |         |
| p50           | 10.08                           | 8.47            |            |         |         |
| mean          | 10.47                           | 8.99            | −1.48∗∗∗   | −3.8    | 0.0000  |
| p75           | 13.25                           | 11.81           |            |         |         |
| max           | 18.83                           | 19.84           |            |         |         |
| stdev         | 3.51                            | 4.38            |            |         |         |

<span id="page-9-1"></span>

| Table 7: Mean CARs for select representative and long event windows |  |  |  |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------|--|--|--|
|---------------------------------------------------------------------|--|--|--|

|     |              | Short event windows |                                 |     |              | Long event windows |                                 |
|-----|--------------|---------------------|---------------------------------|-----|--------------|--------------------|---------------------------------|
| Day | Event window | Mean CAR            | Cross-sect. t-statistic for CAR | Day | Event window | Mean CAR           | Cross-sect. t-statistic for CAR |
| −1  | [−1,−1]      | −0.08%∗             | −1.380                          |     |              |                    |                                 |
| 0   | [−1,0]       | −0.18%∗∗            | −1.989                          | 30  | [−1,30]      | −0.29%             | −0.876                          |
| 1   | [−1,1]       | −0.32%∗∗            | −2.289                          | 45  | [−1,45]      | −0.61%∗            | −1.415                          |
| 2   | [−1,2]       | −0.29%∗∗            | −2.230                          | 60  | [−1,60]      | −1.05%∗∗           | −2.031                          |
| 3   | [−1,3]       | −0.33%∗∗            | −2.264                          | 75  | [−1,75]      | −0.92%∗            | −1.588                          |
| 4   | [−1,4]       | −0.35%∗∗            | −2.204                          | 90  | [−1,90]      | −1.43%∗∗           | −2.187                          |
| 5   | [−1,5]       | −0.39%∗∗∗           | −2.369                          |     |              |                    |                                 |
| 6   | [−1,6]       | −0.35%∗∗            | −1.898                          | 120 | [−1 120]     | −0.85%             | −0.969                          |
| 7   | [−1,7]       | −0.47%∗∗∗           | −2.370                          |     |              |                    |                                 |
| 8   | [−1,8]       | −0.48%∗∗∗           | −2.469                          | 180 | [−1 180]     | −1.54%∗            | −1.497                          |
| 9   | [−1,9]       | −0.49%∗∗∗           | −2.447                          |     |              |                    |                                 |
| 10  | [−1,10]      | −0.46%∗∗            | −2.207                          |     |              |                    |                                 |
| 11  | [−1,11]      | −0.46%∗∗            | −2.144                          |     |              |                    |                                 |
| 12  | [−1,12]      | −0.50%∗∗            | −2.148                          |     |              |                    |                                 |
| 13  | [−1,13]      | −0.43%∗∗            | −1.835                          |     |              |                    |                                 |
| 14  | [−1,14]      | −0.29%              | −1.262                          |     |              |                    |                                 |
| 15  | [−1,15]      | −0.30%              | −1.256                          |     |              |                    |                                 |

## *N* = 1397.

∗*P* < 0.1, ∗∗*P* < 0.05, ∗∗∗*P* < 0.01 (one-sided test).

dents are growing at a smaller pace than other incidents. We confirm these patterns formally using Survival Analysis based on ∼16 500 companies in Compustat and 25 320 firm-year observations, where 1284 firms experienced a cyber incident and 3187 firm-year observations are for firms involved in third-party induced cyber incidents. [Figure 3](#page-8-0) depicts the cumulative and smoothed hazard function estimated for the subsample of third-party induced incidents and for the subsample of all other incidents. Graphically, the hazard functions suggest that, in the recent 10 years, the hazard of third-party induced incidents is actually dropping.

[Table 5](#page-8-1) reports the SA multivariate hazard regression results. Based on the coefficient of dummy **D\_ThirdPartyIncident**, we see no evidence that the hazard of experiencing third-party induced cyber incidents is larger than experiencing other incidents. In fact, the **D\_ThirdPartyIncident** dummy has a nonsignificant coefficient, and its negative sign suggests the opposite. This **result indicates that hypothesis H1a is not supported**. It is worth adding that the regression results show characteristics common of organizations that experience cyber incidents, namely, firms that are larger, riskier, and more IT intensive.

We next test hypothesis H1b, which concerns the volume of data compromised by cyber incidents. The average number of data records compromised per incident is larger for third-party induced incidents (see [Table 6\)](#page-9-0). The mean of log number of compromised records per incident is 10.45 (or 6.5 million records) for third-party induced incidents, compared with 8.99 (or 4.55 million records) for other incidents. As seen in [Table 6,](#page-9-0) a *t*-test of the difference of means of log number of compromised records for the two subsamples is statistically significant, indicating that third-party induced incidents compromise a substantially larger number of data records (*P* < 0.000). This supports hypothesis H1b.

## Adverse changes in firm equity returns

We next test hypotheses H2a/b/c, which concern the adverse impact of cyber incidents on firm equity returns, as explained in the section "Market impact and the event study methodology." To establish a baseline, we examine in [Table 7](#page-9-1) the mean CARs for the benchmark sample of non-third-party induced incidents. For short event windows (up to day 15), mean CARs are negative (up to −0.5%) and statistically significant for a majority of event windows. For representative long event windows (up to day 180), mean CARs are more negative (up to −1.54%) and statistically significant for some windows. To add to the picture, [Fig. 4](#page-10-0) shows a plot of the mean CARs for third-party induced incident and all other incident firms. The mean CARs for both samples track closely up until day 80 or so. Thereafter mean CARs for third-party induced incidents climb up but remain negative until day 180. The visual pattern in [Fig. 4](#page-10-0) is confirmed based on univariate t-tests of mean differences in CARs for event windows between [−1,1] and [−1,180] (see Appendix A, [Fig. A.1\)](#page-16-5).

<span id="page-10-0"></span><span id="page-10-1"></span>**Figure 4:** Mean CARs for third-party induced incident firms and all other firms.

**Figure 5:** Mean CARs for first- and third-party firms in third-party induced incidents.

This means that shareholders penalize more strongly firms involved in third-party induced incidents (at least in the first 80 days after an incident).

We move on to test hypotheses H2a/b, which concern the drop in equity returns for first- and third-party firms. [Figure 5](#page-10-1) plots the mean CARs for first- and third-party firms involved in third-party induced incidents, separately from all other incident firms. Mean CARs for first-party firms track closely the mean CARs for other incident firms up until day 120, after which they are slightly higher but mostly negative. Mean CARs for third-party firms are notably lower up until day 80 but climb higher and remain mostly negative until day 180. The visual pattern seen in [Fig. 5](#page-10-1) is confirmed based on a univariate *t*-test of the difference in CARs for event windows between [−1,1] and [−1,180] (see Appendix A, [Fig. A.2\)](#page-17-0). This means that, of the firms involved in third-party induced incidents, shareholders penalize third-party firms stronger in the first 80 days.

We also test hypotheses Ha/b using multivariate regression and show the results in [Table 8.](#page-11-0) Columns 1 and 2 include the control variables and the remaining columns add dummies **D\_First** and **D\_Third**. Both dummies have negative coefficients, consistent with the earlier comparison with non-third-party incidents, but only **D\_Third** has statistically significant coefficients for most event windows tested. This means that only third-party firms tend to suffer more negative CARs than all other firms experiencing a cyber incident. **These results support Hypothesis H2b but not H2a.** Other observations are noteworthy. CARs are more negative for firms that are riskier (**FirmRisk**) and have experienced internally triggered incidents (**Internal**), whereas CARs are less negative for firms that are larger (**FirmSize**) and have suffered malicious incidents. This suggests that shareholders inflict larger (smaller) penalties for internally (maliciously) triggered incidents, perhaps, because they are perceived to be more avoidable.

We move on to test hypothesis H2c, which concerns the difference between small and large third-party firms. As seen in [Fig. 6,](#page-12-0) small third-party firms have notably more negative mean CARs than large third-party firms between day 20 and day 110, but thereafter mean CARs track those of non-third-party incident firms. By contrast, mean CARs for large third-party firms are not worse until day 30 and thereafter become positive on the most part. The visual pattern seen in [Fig. 6](#page-12-0) is confirmed based on a univariate t-test of the difference in CARs for event windows ranging from [−1,1] to [−1,180] (see Appendix A, [Fig. A.3\)](#page-17-1). This means that, of the firms involved in third-party induced incidents, small third-party firms are penalized the most by shareholders while large third-party firms are hardly penalized.

We also test hypothesis H2c in multivariate setting, yielding the regression results shown in [Table 9.](#page-13-0) All regression runs use the same control variables shown in [Table 8](#page-11-0) and add the dummy **D\_SmallThird**. Columns 1 through 5 use the full sample of all cyber incidents, whereas columns 6 through 10 use a subsample of only third-party firms. Dummy **D\_SmallThird** has negative and significant coefficients for the long event windows tested, consistent with

|                                                                                                    |               |                |               |                |                | Entire sample (n = 1033) |                 |               |                |                 |                 |                  |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|----------------|---------------|----------------|----------------|--------------------------|-----------------|---------------|----------------|-----------------|-----------------|------------------|
| [window]<br>CAR                                                                                    | [−1,5]<br>(1) | [−1,15]<br>(2) | [−1,5]<br>(3) | [−1,15]<br>(4) | [−1,21]<br>(5) | [−1,63]<br>(6)           | [−1,126]<br>(7) | [−1,5]<br>(8) | [−1,15]<br>(9) | [−1,21]<br>(10) | [−1,63]<br>(11) | [−1,126]<br>(12) |
| FirmGrowth                                                                                         | 0.043         | 0.044          | 0.043         | 0.044          | 0.002          | −0.016                   | −0.010          | 0.039         | 0.036          | −0.007          | −0.027          | −0.015           |
|                                                                                                    | (1.14)        | (1.16)         | (1.13)        | (1.16)         | (0.05)         | (−0.42)                  | (−0.26)         | (1.02)        | (0.96)         | (−0.18)         | (−0.70)         | (−0.38)          |
| FirmSize                                                                                           | 0.086∗∗       | 0.102∗∗        | 0.087∗∗       | 0.102∗∗        | 0.038          | 0.017                    | −0.001          | 0.086∗∗       | 0.102∗∗        | 0.038           | 0.017           | −0.002           |
|                                                                                                    | (2.05)        | (2.43)         | (2.05)        | (2.43)         | (0.90)         | (0.41)                   | (−0.03)         | (2.05)        | (2.44)         | (0.90)          | (0.41)          | (−0.05)          |
| ROA                                                                                                | 0.054         | 0.021          | 0.054         | 0.021          | 0.033          | 0.086∗∗                  | 0.072∗          | 0.052         | 0.017          | 0.028           | 0.080∗          | 0.068            |
|                                                                                                    | (1.27)        | (0.50)         | (1.27)        | (0.51)         | (0.77)         | (2.01)                   | (1.66)          | (1.21)        | (0.41)         | (0.67)          | (1.88)          | (1.57)           |
| FirmRisk                                                                                           | −0.127∗∗∗     | −0.119∗∗∗      | −0.128∗∗∗     | −0.119∗∗∗      | −0.150∗∗∗      | −0.053                   | −0.052          | −0.133∗∗∗     | −0.127∗∗∗      | −0.160∗∗∗       | −0.063          | −0.056           |
|                                                                                                    | (−2.99)       | (−2.83)        | (−2.99)       | (−2.83)        | (−3.55)        | (−1.23)                  | (−1.21)         | (−3.10)       | (−3.03)        | (−3.80)         | (−1.47)         | (−1.29)          |
| Financials                                                                                         | 0.104∗∗       | 0.159∗∗∗       | 0.104∗∗       | 0.159∗∗∗       | 0.120∗∗∗       | 0.101∗∗                  | 0.073           | 0.099∗∗       | 0.151∗∗∗       | 0.111∗∗         | 0.088∗          | 0.067            |
|                                                                                                    | (2.32)        | (3.54)         | (2.32)        | (3.55)         | (2.67)         | (2.22)                   | (1.60)          | (2.22)        | (3.37)         | (2.48)          | (1.94)          | (1.46)           |
| Services                                                                                           | 0.086∗∗       | 0.098∗∗        | 0.086∗∗       | 0.098∗∗        | 0.064          | −0.005                   | 0.012           | 0.086∗∗       | 0.098∗∗        | 0.065           | −0.005          | 0.012            |
|                                                                                                    | (2.02)        | (2.30)         | (2.03)        | (2.31)         | (1.51)         | (−0.11)                  | (0.28)          | (2.03)        | (2.32)         | (1.54)          | (−0.12)         | (0.27)           |
| MyYear                                                                                             | 0.043         | 0.027          | 0.043         | 0.027          | −0.015         | −0.100∗∗∗                | −0.053          | 0.043         | 0.028          | −0.015          | −0.098∗∗        | −0.051           |
|                                                                                                    | (1.13)        | (0.72)         | (1.11)        | (0.71)         | (−0.39)        | (−2.61)                  | (−1.37)         | (1.13)        | (0.74)         | (−0.39)         | (−2.57)         | (−1.32)          |
| Internal                                                                                           | −0.046        | −0.078∗∗       | −0.046        | −0.077∗∗       | −0.070∗        | −0.070∗                  | −0.056          | −0.048        | −0.081∗∗       | −0.073∗         | −0.075∗∗        | −0.060           |
|                                                                                                    | (−1.22)       | (−2.07)        | (−1.21)       | (−2.05)        | (−1.84)        | (−1.82)                  | (−1.45)         | (−1.27)       | (−2.15)        | (−1.94)         | (−1.99)         | (−1.55)          |
| Malicious                                                                                          | 0.039         | 0.056          | 0.039         | 0.055          | 0.093∗∗        | 0.094∗∗                  | 0.085∗∗         | 0.030         | 0.038          | 0.073∗          | 0.071∗          | 0.076∗           |
|                                                                                                    | (1.03)        | (1.46)         | (1.03)        | (1.45)         | (2.42)         | (2.43)                   | (2.18)          | (0.76)        | (1.00)         | (1.87)          | (1.81)          | (1.92)           |
| D_First                                                                                            |               |                | −0.008        | −0.012         | 0.011          | −0.038                   | −0.045          |               |                |                 |                 |                  |
|                                                                                                    |               |                | (−0.20)       | (−0.32)        | (0.30)         | (−1.01)                  | (−1.19)         |               |                |                 |                 |                  |
| D_Third                                                                                            |               |                |               |                |                |                          |                 | −0.055        | −0.096∗∗       | −0.111∗∗∗       | −0.134∗∗∗       | −0.053           |
|                                                                                                    |               |                |               |                |                |                          |                 | (−1.43)       | (−2.53)        | (−2.92)         | (−3.51)         | (−1.37)          |
| R2                                                                                                 | 0.048         | 0.055          | 0.048         | 0.055          | 0.045          | 0.033                    | 0.021           | 0.050         | 0.064          | 0.056           | 0.049           | 0.021            |
| Adjusted R2                                                                                        | 0.035         | 0.043          | 0.034         | 0.042          | 0.031          | 0.019                    | 0.006           | 0.037         | 0.050          | 0.043           | 0.035           | 0.007            |
| Standardized beta coefficients; t statistics in parentheses.<br>∗P < 0.1, ∗∗P < 0.05, ∗∗∗P < 0.01. |               |                |               |                |                |                          |                 |               |                |                 |                 |                  |

<span id="page-11-0"></span>

<span id="page-12-0"></span>**Figure 6:** Mean CARs for small and large third-party firms in third-party induced incidents.

our expectation and the pattern visualized in [Fig. 6.](#page-12-0) This means that, on average, small third-party firms suffer more negative CARs than all firms experiencing a cyber incident (columns 2–5) and to large third-party firms (columns 8–10). These results support Hypothesis H2c.

## **Discussion and Implications**

This paper set out to address three gaps concerning the growing interest in third-party induced cyber incidents. First, are third-party induced cyber incidents growing in prevalence as compared with other cyber incidents? Our analysis shows this not to be the case. In fact, the prevalence of third-party induced incidents seems to be growing at a slower pace than that of other cyber incidents. Second, are thirdparty induced cyber incidents greater in scale, or compromise greater volumes of data, compared with other cyber incidents? We find the answer to be positive. Our analysis finds evidence that third-party induced cyber incidents, on average, compromise considerably larger amounts of data.

We are puzzled by the discrepancy between our finding about the prevalence of third-party induced incidents and what practitioner surveys report, as detailed in the section "Introduction" [\[1,](#page-14-0) [6,](#page-14-1) [5\]](#page-14-4). Is it that surveyed firms simply have wrong perceptions, or do they just find it more convenient to push the blame to another party? Alternatively, could the reason be that the data available on actual thirdparty induced cyber incidents is incomplete? Our sample of cyber incidents is among the largest studied to date and combines data from multiple sources. Nonetheless, it can still be limited by the fact many firms do not disclose such incidents. For example, while the Security and Exchange Commission requires public firms to disclose cyber incidents that materially damage their business, over 60% of cyber incidents are not disclosed by firms [\[75–77\]](#page-16-6); rather, they are disclosed by regulatory bodies and whistleblowers. Without proper regulatory disclosure requirements and enforcement, the potential for incompleteness of data on third-party induced incidents is likely to remain an issue. Overall, how to reconcile our finding with practitioner reports on the prevalence of such cyber incidents is an important issue for future research to study.

The third gap we set out to address is which party pays more of the economic price for third-party induced cyber incidents—the client firm or the service provider firm? Our analysis measures economic price by the drop in equity returns of cyber incident firms. We started with the price paid by first-party client firms. We find this price to be no greater than when client firms experience homegrown cyber incidents. In other words, client firms are not worse off when a cyber incident they suffer is induced by a third-party provider instead of homegrown. As to third-party service provider firms, the answer is more nuanced. It is small third-party firms that suffer the blunt of the economic price for cyber incidents—they experience notably larger drops in their equity returns than large third-party firms. In fact, large third-party firms suffer no discernible drop in equity returns.

Our findings about the economic price paid for third-party induced cyber incidents inform the parties involved on their expected cyber risk exposure, but they do not tell the whole story. The effect of these cyber incidents may go beyond a relatively short-term drop in equity returns. Some studies are starting to explore time-lagged effects on firm financial performance, particularly on firms' earnings and earnings potential [\[78,](#page-16-7) [28,](#page-15-2) [13\]](#page-14-10). In the same spirit, one could consider the effect of cyber incidents on the IT reputation of client firms and service provider firms engaged in the exchange of services. This type of effect should be of great interest to third-party firms whose business centers on IT-based service offerings (e.g. hosted ERP services, SAAS, and other cloud computing services). Future research on long-term effects of third-party induced cyber incidents could shed more light on the reasons interest in these cyber incidents has been growing.

Our findings have implications that lead to important questions for future research. First, given our results showing that both client firms and (at least small) service provider firms suffer value loss upon experiencing third-party induced incidents, one potential implication is that the total value loss per third-party induced cyber incident is greater than per other types of cyber incident. This intriguing plausibility raises a curious theoretical and empirical quandary.

A second important implication pertains to what client firms could do to reduce their cyber risk exposure. Some firms are taking the obvious but nontrivial route of bringing back home outsourced services that appear to be almost completely out of their control. To illustrate, the following is a sample of corporate financial disclosure to shareholders.

Green Brick Partners, Inc. 2015 [10-K]. The Company utilizes an integrated Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) software system by a third-party service organization … the Company was unable to conclude that its service organization maintained effective controls over its information technology environment to (i) prevent unauthorized database and application access, and (ii) maintain effective security administration and appropriate change management for the application maintained by the third-party service organization … This resulted in an inability to rely on the accuracy and completeness of data and key application reports obtained from the application at the third-party service organization … The remediation … Manage-

|                                                                                                    |               |                | Entire sample (n = 1033) |                |                 |               |                | Subsample of third-party firms (n = 108) |                |                  |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|----------------|--------------------------|----------------|-----------------|---------------|----------------|------------------------------------------|----------------|------------------|
| [window]<br>CAR                                                                                    | [−1,5]<br>(1) | [−1,15]<br>(2) | [−1,21]<br>(3)           | [−1,63]<br>(4) | [−1,126]<br>(5) | [−1,5]<br>(6) | [−1,15]<br>(7) | [−1,21]<br>(8)                           | [−1,63]<br>(9) | [−1,126]<br>(10) |
| FirmGrowth                                                                                         | 0.066         | 0.130∗∗        | 0.116∗∗                  | 0.119∗∗        | 0.066           | 0.091         | 0.288          | 0.282∗                                   | 0.280∗         | −0.003           |
|                                                                                                    | (1.31)        | (2.58)         | (2.32)                   | (2.39)         | (1.29)          | (0.47)        | (1.63)         | (1.98)                                   | (1.98)         | (−0.02)          |
| FirmSize                                                                                           | 0.093∗∗       | 0.109∗∗        | 0.069                    | 0.056          | 0.060           | 0.370         | 0.159          | 0.625∗∗∗                                 | 0.486∗∗        | 0.528∗∗          |
|                                                                                                    | (2.00)        | (2.35)         | (1.50)                   | (1.21)         | (1.28)          | (1.44)        | (−0.62)        | (−3.02)                                  | (−2.37)        | (−2.32)          |
| ROA                                                                                                | −0.008        | −0.030         | 0.010                    | −0.010         | 0.051           | −0.289        | −0.260         | −0.238                                   | −0.015         | 0.330∗           |
|                                                                                                    | (−0.15)       | (−0.56)        | (0.18)                   | (−0.19)        | (0.94)          | (−1.31)       | (−1.37)        | (−1.55)                                  | (−0.10)        | (1.95)           |
| FirmRisk                                                                                           | −0.102∗∗      | −0.092∗∗       | −0.063                   | 0.047          | 0.057           | −0.103        | −0.064         | −0.027                                   | −0.141         | −0.275∗∗         |
|                                                                                                    | (−2.24)       | (−2.07)        | (−1.41)                  | (1.06)         | (1.25)          | (−0.68)       | (−0.45)        | (−0.23)                                  | (−1.24)        | (−2.19)          |
| Financials                                                                                         | 0.078         | 0.150∗∗∗       | 0.178∗∗∗                 | 0.116∗∗        | 0.102∗∗         | −0.027        | 0.261          | 0.530∗∗∗                                 | 0.524∗∗∗       | 0.580∗∗∗         |
|                                                                                                    | (1.63)        | (3.15)         | (3.77)                   | (2.47)         | (2.11)          | (−0.14)       | (1.47)         | (3.71)                                   | (3.69)         | (3.68)           |
| Services                                                                                           | 0.079∗        | 0.061          | 0.060                    | 0.018          | 0.035           | 0.075         | 0.379∗∗        | 0.567∗∗∗                                 | 0.372∗∗∗       | 0.276∗           |
|                                                                                                    | (1.75)        | (1.36)         | (1.34)                   | (0.41)         | (0.78)          | (0.44)        | (2.38)         | (4.41)                                   | (2.91)         | (1.95)           |
| MyYear                                                                                             | 0.026         | −0.012         | −0.065                   | −0.125∗∗∗      | −0.095∗∗        | 0.096         | 0.063          | 0.159                                    | 0.042          | −0.035           |
|                                                                                                    | (0.64)        | (−0.29)        | (−1.62)                  | (−3.13)        | (−2.32)         | (0.62)        | (0.43)         | (1.34)                                   | (0.35)         | (−0.27)          |
| Internal                                                                                           | −0.067∗       | −0.069∗        | −0.069∗                  | −0.028         | −0.046          | −0.014        | −0.124         | −0.028                                   | −0.146         | −0.211∗          |
|                                                                                                    | (−1.66)       | (−1.74)        | (−1.73)                  | (−0.71)        | (−1.14)         | (−0.10)       | (−0.94)        | (−0.26)                                  | (−1.37)        | (−1.79)          |
| Malicious                                                                                          | 0.030         | 0.061          | 0.092∗∗                  | 0.112∗∗∗       | 0.082∗∗         | 0.178         | 0.076          | 0.103                                    | 0.111          | 0.107            |
|                                                                                                    | (0.72)        | (1.49)         | (2.26)                   | (2.77)         | (1.98)          | (1.31)        | (0.58)         | (0.98)                                   | (1.05)         | (0.92)           |
| D_SmallThird                                                                                       | −0.033        | −0.068∗        | −0.095∗∗                 | −0.159∗∗∗      | −0.082∗∗        | 0.260         | −0.432         | −1.050∗∗∗                                | −0.948∗∗∗      | −0.752∗∗∗        |
|                                                                                                    | (−0.80)       | (−1.68)        | (−2.34)                  | (−3.96)        | (−1.99)         | (0.82)        | (−1.43)        | (−4.32)                                  | (−3.93)        | (−2.81)          |
| R2                                                                                                 | 0.036         | 0.054          | 0.062                    | 0.082          | 0.042           | 0.138         | 0.222          | 0.494                                    | 0.501          | 0.386            |
| Adjusted R2                                                                                        | 0.020         | 0.038          | 0.046                    | 0.067          | 0.026           | −0.016        | 0.085          | 0.405                                    | 0.414          | 0.278            |
| Standardized beta coefficients; t statistics in parentheses.<br>∗P < 0.1, ∗∗P < 0.05, ∗∗∗P < 0.01. |               |                |                          |                |                 |               |                |                                          |                |                  |

<span id="page-13-0"></span>

ment will move to an ERP self-host structure that involves hosting and managing the Company's ERP software system and underlying infrastructure internally …

Another route is for client firms to require service providers to maintain information security certification of some sort. We can understand this option from a market-based perspective. If third-party service providers lack incentives to invest in cybersecurity because current laws and regulations put more of the burden on client firms [\[12\]](#page-14-9), as explained in the section "Accountability and stock market reaction," there is a real concern that service providers are acting opportunistically. The market-based view suggests that reputation, or the fear of its loss, is a good mechanism for constraining service providers' opportunistic behavior. A client firm may not be able to vet service providers' reputation by auditing their IT platforms and information security controls. However, a client firm could require service providers to hire independent trusted third parties to vouch for their reputation upon evaluating and certifying the security and reliability of their IT platforms. These independent certification parties are essential to market-based trust. The reward service providers expect from investing in information security certification is enhanced reputation and market value, as demonstrated by multiple empirical studies [\[33–35,](#page-15-7) [37\]](#page-15-39). By the same token, the way the stock market rewards and creates value for service providers who obtain information security certification, the market would penalize stronger certified service providers for third-party induced cyber incidents. Hence, in principle, the same reputation mechanism that rewards "certified" service providers would also "penalize" them when they do not live up to their reputation. It is this dual market-based reputation mechanism that should hold third-party service providers more accountable to their client firms and shareholders. However, whether this certification-based reputation mechanism works in practice remains an open question for future research. No study has yet examined whether certified service providers tend be less involved in third-party induced cyber incidents, or whether the stock market holds them more accountable when they are involved in such incidents. Evidence to this extent would be extremely valuable to client firms who are increasingly compelled to rely on third-party service providers but are concerned about the associated cyber risk exposure.

## **Conclusion**

This paper is first to provide a look into the area of third-party induced cyber incidents. It yields numerous fact-based insights into the prevalence of these incidents, the volume of data these incidents tend to compromise, and their economic effects on the market value of firms involved. In relation to the latter, the paper demonstrates the value of using a market-based perspective to understand the accountability of parties involved in third-party induced cyber incidents. Respectively, it also highlights follow-up questions that remain open for future research. We are hopeful that this study will stimulate scholarly and industry dialogues and foster more research on third-party induced cyber incidents and their importance in an increasingly networked economy.

## **Conflict of interest statement**

None declared.

## **References**

<span id="page-14-0"></span>1. BlueVoyant. Large vendor ecosystems and low visibility are increasing third-party cyber risk. PR Newswire, 23 September 2020.

- <span id="page-14-3"></span>2. DiGiacomo J. Third-party data breaches: weakest link in cybersecurity 2017. Revision Legal. https://revisionlegal.com/internet-law/data-breach [/third-party-data-breaches/, Last accessed 9/9/2021.](https://revisionlegal.com/internet-law/data-breach/third-party-data-breaches/)
- <span id="page-14-18"></span>3. Gozman D, Willcocks L. The emerging Cloud Dilemma: balancing innovation with cross-border privacy and outsourcing regulations. *J Bus Res* 2019;**97**:235–56.
- 4. Messmer E. Data breach? Blame your third party's remote access systems *Network World*, 7 February 2012.
- <span id="page-14-4"></span>5. Ponemon L. *Data Risk in the Third-Party Ecosystem*. Ponemon Institute, 2018 *Business Wire*, Nov. 15, 2018, https://www.prnewswire.com/new s-releases/opus–ponemon-institute-announce-results-of-2017-third-pa [rty-data-risk-study-56-of-companies-experienced-data-breach-yet-only](https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/opus--ponemon-institute-announce-results-of-2017-third-party-data-risk-study-56-of-companies-experienced-data-breach-yet-only-17-are-prepared-to-mitigate-risk-300527005.html) -17-are-prepared-to-mitigate-risk-300527005.html.
- <span id="page-14-1"></span>6. IBM. IBM report: compromised employee accounts led to most expensive data breaches over past year. *PR Newswire Asia*, 29 July 2020. https: [//newsroom.ibm.com/2020-07-29-IBM-Report-Compromised-Employe](https://newsroom.ibm.com/2020-07-29-IBM-Report-Compromised-Employee-Accounts-Led-to-Most-Expensive-Data-Breaches-Over-Past-Year) e-Accounts-Led-to-Most-Expensive-Data-Breaches-Over-Past-Year .
- <span id="page-14-2"></span>7. Akinrolabu O, New S. Can improved transparency reduce supply chain risks in cloud computing? *Oper Supply Chain Manage* 2017;**10**:130–40.
- <span id="page-14-5"></span>8. Benaroch M, Chernobai A. Linking operational IT failures to IT control weaknesses. *Proceedings of AMCIS'2015*, Puerto Rico, 2015.
- <span id="page-14-6"></span>9. Vasishta NV, Gupta M, Misra SK. *et al.* Optimizing cybersecurity program: evidence from data breaches in healthcare. *13th Annual Symposium on Information Assurance (ASIA'18)*, Albany, NY, 2018.
- <span id="page-14-7"></span>10. NetDiligence. 2016. https://netdiligence.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/1 [0/P02\\_NetDiligence-2016-Cyber-Claims-Study-ONLINE.pdf. Last ac](https://netdiligence.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/P02_NetDiligence-2016-Cyber-Claims-Study-ONLINE.pdf)cessed 9/9/2021.
- <span id="page-14-8"></span>11. Vijayan J. Target breach happened because of a basic network segmentation error. *Computerworld* 2014, 6 February 2014. [https://www.computerworld.com/article/2487425/target-breach-ha](https://www.computerworld.com/article/2487425/target-breach-happened-because-of-a-basic-network-segmentation-error.html) ppened-because-of-a-basic-network-segmentation-error.html
- <span id="page-14-9"></span>12. Park S. Why information security law has been ineffective in addressing security vulnerabilities: evidence from California data breach notifications and relevant court and government records. *Int Rev Law Econ* 2019;**58**:132–45.
- <span id="page-14-10"></span>13. Richardson VJ, Smith ES, Weidenmier WM. Much ado about nothing: the (lack of) economic impact of data privacy breaches. *J Inf Syst* 2019;**33**:227–65.
- <span id="page-14-11"></span>14. Hogan KM. A global comparison of corporate value adjustments to news of cyber-attacks. *J Gov Regul* 2020;**9**:34–44.
- <span id="page-14-12"></span>15. CISA. Cost of a cyber incident: systematic review and cross-validation. 26 October 2020. https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/publication [s/CISA-OCE\\_Cost\\_of\\_Cyber\\_Incidents\\_Study-FINAL\\_508.pdf. Last ac](https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/publications/CISA-OCE_Cost_of_Cyber_Incidents_Study-FINAL_508.pdf)cessed 9/9/2021.
- <span id="page-14-13"></span>16. Fama EF. Efficient capital markets: a review of theory and empirical work. *J Finance* 1970;**25**:383–417.
- <span id="page-14-14"></span>17. Aytes K, Byers S, Mukunthan S. The economic impact of information security breaches: firm value and intra-industry effects, *AMCIS 2006 Proceedings.* Paper 399, 2006. <http://aisel.aisnet.org/amcis2006/399>
- <span id="page-14-19"></span>18. Hovav A, D'Arcy J. The impact of denial-of-service attack announcements on the market value of firms. *Risk Manag Insur Rev* 2003;**6**:97–121.
- <span id="page-14-16"></span>19. Kannan K, Rees J, Sridhar S. Market reactions to information security breach announcements: an empirical analysis. *Int J Electron Commer* 2007;**12**:69–91.
- <span id="page-14-15"></span>20. Acquisti A, Friedman A, Telang R. Is there a cost to privacy breaches? An event study. 27th International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS), Milwaukee, 2006.
- <span id="page-14-17"></span>21. Cavusoglu H, Mishra B, Raghunathan S. The effect of internet security breach announcements on market value: capital market reactions for breached firms and internet security developers. *Int J Electron Commer* 2004;**9**:70–104.
- <span id="page-14-20"></span>22. Garg A, Curtis J, Halper H. Quantifying the financial impact of IT security breaches. *Inf Manag Comput Secur* 2003;**11**:74–83.
- 23. Gatzlaff K, McCullough KA. The effect of data breaches on shareholder wealth. *Risk Manag Insur Rev* 2010;**13**:61–83.
- 24. Ko M, Dorantes C. The impact of information security breaches on financial performance of the breached firms: an empirical investigation. *J IT Manag* 2006;**17**:13–22.

- <span id="page-15-19"></span>25. Telang R, Wattal S. An empirical analysis of the impact of software vulnerability announcements on firm stock price. *IEEE Trans Softw Eng* 2007;**33**:544–57.
- <span id="page-15-0"></span>26. Dane K. Do data breaches matter? *ISSA J* 2016;**May**:22–9.
- <span id="page-15-1"></span>27. Tanimura JK, Wehrly EW. The market value and reputational effects from lost confidential information. *Int J Financ Manag* 2009;**5**: 18–35.
- <span id="page-15-2"></span>28. Kamiya S, Kang JK, Kim J. *et al.* Risk management, firm reputation, and the impact of successful cyberattacks on target firms. *J Financ Econ* 2021;**139**:719–49.
- <span id="page-15-3"></span>29. Campbell K, Gordon L, Loeb M. *et al.* The economic cost of publicly announced information security breaches: empirical evidence from the stock market. *J Comput Secur* 2003;**11**:431–48.
- <span id="page-15-4"></span>30. Goldstein J, Chernobai A, Benaroch M. Event study analysis of the economic impact of IT operational risk and its subcategories.*J Assoc Inf Syst* 2011;**12**:606–31.
- <span id="page-15-5"></span>31. Zhou L. The value of security audits, asymmetric information and market impacts of security breaches 2004. Doctoral Dissertation, University of Maryland.
- <span id="page-15-6"></span>32. Bolster P, Pantalone CH, Trahan EA. Security breaches and firm value. *J Bus Valuation Econ Loss Analysis* 2010;**5**:Article 1.
- <span id="page-15-7"></span>33. Deane K, Goldberg M, Rakes R. *et al.* The effect of information security certification announcements on the market value of the firm. *Inf Technol Manag* 2019;**20**:107–21, published online.
- 34. Kang HS. An analysis of information security management system and certification standard for information security. *J Secur Eng* 2014;**11**:455– 68.
- 35. Malliouris DD, Simpson AC. The stock market impact of information security investments: the case of security standards. 2019. *Workshop on Economics of Information Security*, Boston, MA.
- 36. Park C-S, Jang S-S, Park Y-T. A study of effect of Information Security Management System [ISMS] certification on organization performance. *Int J Comput Sci Netw Secur* 2010;**10**:10–21.
- <span id="page-15-39"></span>37. Szubartowicz E, Schryen G. Timing in information security: an event study on the impact of information security investment announcements. 2018. [Working paper, University Regensburg, Germany. \(](https://epub.uni-regensburg.de/37576) https://epub.uni-reg ensburg.de/37576/)
- <span id="page-15-8"></span>38. Bryant L. Cybersecurity Regulati ons: Banking and Third Party Providers. *A Capstone Project Submitted to the Faculty of Utica College, May 2016* 2016, [https://www.proquest.com/openview/912fc0d5c5c4fd64f4b11508](https://powerxeditor.aptaracorp.com/ED5084/Editor/PXE_Editor.aspx?EditorID=696a4307-daa7-4e55-91cb-b1622d653ea6) a36e970c/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750&diss=y.
- <span id="page-15-9"></span>39. Kansteiner M J. MITIGATINGRISK TO DOD INFORMATION NET-WORKS BY IMPROVING NETWORK SECURITY IN THIRD-PARTY INFORMATION NETWORKS. *Master's thesis*. 2016, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA 93943-5000, June 2016.
- <span id="page-15-10"></span>40. Goldstein Daniel J. Amid Cyber Threat to your Business Data, Trust but Verify Third-Party Processing. *Mortgage Banking* 2015 **85**.
- <span id="page-15-11"></span>41. Kroll K. Are Your BusinessPartners Letti ng in the Hackers?" Compliance Week. November 25. 2014, 64–72, [http://web.b.ebscohost.com.libproxy](https://cas.nps.edu/NPS/login?service=https%3a%2f%2flogin.libproxy.nps.edu%2flogin%3fqurl%3dezp.2aHR0cDovL3dlYi5iLmVic2NvaG9zdC5jb20v) .nps.edu.
- <span id="page-15-12"></span>42. Horvath AS, Agrawal R. Trust in cloud computing. *Proceedings of the IEEE SoutheastCon 2015*, Fort Lauderdale, FL, 1–8, 2015.
- <span id="page-15-13"></span>43. Vijayan J. Cloud security: transparency is crucial for service providers. 2015. http://www.cio.com/article/2925773/cloud-security/cloudsecu [rity-transparency-is-crucial-for-service-providers.html. Last accessed](http://www.cio.com/article/2925773/cloud-security/cloudsecurity-transparency-is-crucial-for-service-providers.html) 9/9/2021.
- <span id="page-15-14"></span>44. Benaroch M. Cyber security and IT outsourcing: challenges and emerging realities. In: Hirschheim R et al. (eds). *IS Outsourcing: The Era of Digital Transformation*. 5th edn. Springer, 2020.
- <span id="page-15-15"></span>45. Dhillon G, Syed R, Sá-Soares F. Information security concerns in IT outsourcing: identifying (in)congruence between clients and vendors. *Inf Manag* 2017;**54**:452–64.
- <span id="page-15-16"></span>46. Raj S. 2011. Common Assurance Maturity Model, 1–2. http: [//www.fstech.co.uk/fst/FSTech\\_Conference\\_2011/Common\\_Assuran](http://www.fstech.co.uk/fst/FSTech_Conference_2011/Common_Assurance_Maturity_Model_Raj_Samani.pdf) ce\_Maturity\_Model\_Raj\_Samani.pdf, Last accessed 05/12/2016.
- <span id="page-15-17"></span>47. Hovav A, D'Arcy J. The impact of virus attack announcements on the market value of firms. *Inf Syst Secur* 2004;**13**:32–40.

- <span id="page-15-18"></span>48. Anthony JH, Choi W, Garbski SV. Market reaction to e-commerce impairments evidenced by website outages. *Int J Account Inf Syst* 2006;**7**: 60–78.
- <span id="page-15-20"></span>49. Leung A, Bose I. Indirect financial loss of phishing to global market. 2008. 29th *International Conference on Information Systems* (ICIS), Paris, France.
- <span id="page-15-21"></span>50. Morse EA, Raval V, Wingender JR. Market price effects of data security breaches. *Inf Secur J: A Glob Perspect* 2011;**20**:263–73.
- <span id="page-15-22"></span>51. Benaroch M, Chernobai A, Goldstein J. An internal control perspective on the market value consequences of IT operational risk events.*Int J Account Inf Syst* 2012;**13**:357–81.
- <span id="page-15-23"></span>52. Hsieh T-S, Noyes D, Liu H. *et al.* Quantifying the impact of data loss incidents on publicly-traded organizations. *2015 IEEE International Symposium on Technologies for Homeland Security (HST)*, 2015.
- <span id="page-15-24"></span>53. Hinz O, Nofer M, Schiereck D. *et al.* The influence of data theft on the share prices and systematic risk of consumer electronics companies. *Inf Manag* 2015;**52**:337–47.
- <span id="page-15-25"></span>54. Jeong CY, Lee S-YT, Lim J-H. The impact of information security breaches and IT security investments on a firm's competitors. *38th International Conference on Information Systems*, Seoul, South Korea, 2017.
- <span id="page-15-26"></span>55. Arcuri MC, Brogi M, Gandolfi G. How does cyber crime affect firms? The effect of information security breaches on stock returns. In: Proceedings of the First Italian Conference on Cybersecurity (ITASEC17), Venice, Italy, 2017.
- <span id="page-15-27"></span>56. Johnson MS, Kang MJ, Lawson T. Stock price reaction to data breaches. *J Finance Issues* 2017;**16**:1–13.
- <span id="page-15-28"></span>57. Lange R, Burger EW. Long-term market implications of data breaches, not. *J Inf Priv Secur* 2017;**13**:1–21.
- <span id="page-15-29"></span>58. Corbet S, Gurdgiev C. What the hack: systematic risk contagion from [cyber events 2017. Working Paper SSRN:](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3033950) https://ssrn.com/abstract=3033 950. Last accessed 9/9/2021.
- <span id="page-15-30"></span>59. Bischoff P. Analysis: how data breaches affect stock market share prices. *Inf Secur Comparitech* 2017, https://www.comparitech.com/blog/infor [mation-security/data-breach-share-price/. Last accessed 9/9/2021.](https://www.comparitech.com/blog/information-security/data-breach-share-price/)
- <span id="page-15-31"></span>60. Bennett J. Computer glitch forced Datek to refuse online orders Monday. *Dow Jones News Service*, 4 May 1999.
- 61. Li K. Web glitch costing ebay \$2m a day. New York Daily News, 12 June 1999. [http://www.nydailynews.com/archives/news/1999/06/12/199](http://www.nydailynews.com/archives/news/1999/06/12/1999-06-12_web_glitch_costing_ebay__2m_.html) 9-06-12\_web\_glitch\_costing\_ebay\_\_2m\_.html
- 62. Spence J. Citigroup hit by QQQQ option data anomaly: report. CBS MarketWatch, 16 February 2005. http://www.marketwatch.com/story/citigr [oup-hit-by-qqqq-option-data-anomaly-report](http://www.marketwatch.com/story/citigroup-hit-by-qqqq-option-data-anomaly-report)
- <span id="page-15-32"></span>63. Say G, Vasudeva G. Learning from digital failures? The effectiveness of firms' divestiture and management turnover responses to data breaches. *Strategy Sci* 2020;**5**:117–42.
- <span id="page-15-33"></span>64. Jenkins A, Anandarajan M, D'Ovidio R. All that glitters is not gold: the role of impression management in data breach notification. *West J Commun* 2014;**78**:337–57.
- <span id="page-15-34"></span>65. Cheng X, Walton S. Do nonprofessional investors care about how and when data breaches are disclosed? *J Inf Syst* 2019;**33**: 163–82.
- <span id="page-15-35"></span>66. McAndrew EJ. Surviving the service provider data breach: cybersecurity law alert. 2019. DLA Piper publications. https: [//www.dlapiper.com/en/us/insights/publications/2019/07/surviving-t](https://www.dlapiper.com/en/us/insights/publications/2019/07/surviving-the-service-provider-data-breach/) he-service-provider-data-breach/, Last accessed 9/9/2021.
- <span id="page-15-36"></span>67. Kopp E, Kaffenberger L, Wilson C. Cyber risk, market failures, and financial stability. 2017. IMF Working Paper (WP/17/185), International Monetary Fund.
- <span id="page-15-37"></span>68. PwC (Price Waterhouse Coopers). 2015. Insurance 2020 & Beyond: Reaping the Dividends of Cyber Resilience. Price Waterhouse Cooper Insurance.
- <span id="page-15-38"></span>69. Moorcraft B. Cyber criminals targeting third-party service providers. *Insurance Business Magazine*, 7 October 2020. [https://www.insurancebusinessmag.com/ca/news/cyber/cyber-crimina](https://www.insurancebusinessmag.com/ca/news/cyber/cyber-criminals-targeting-thirdparty-service-providers-235583.aspx) ls-targeting-thirdparty-service-providers-235583.aspx

- <span id="page-16-0"></span>70. First Data. Payment card data breaches: what you need to know about your risk and liability. 2014. First Data, https://www.firstdata.com/downl [oads/thought-leadership/13405\\_0714\\_Payment\\_Card\\_Data\\_Breach.pdf](https://www.firstdata.com/downloads/thought-leadership/13405_0714_Payment_Card_Data_Breach.pdf)
- <span id="page-16-1"></span>71. Miller RG. *Survival Analysis*. John Wiley & Sons, 1997, *ISBN 0-471- 25218-2*.
- <span id="page-16-2"></span>72. McWilliams A, Siegel D. Event studies in management research: theoretical and empirical issues. *Acad Manag J* 1997;**40**:626–57.
- <span id="page-16-3"></span>73. Brown S, Warner J. Using daily stock returns: the case of event studies. *J Financ Econ* 1985;**14**:3–31.
- <span id="page-16-4"></span>74. Hilary G, Segal B, Zhang M H. Cyber-Risk Disclosure: Who Cares?" (October 14, 2016). Georgetown McDonough School of Business Re[search Paper No. 2852519, Available at SSRN:](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2852519) https://ssrn.com/abstrac t=2852519. Last accessed 9/9/2021.
- <span id="page-16-6"></span>75. Amir E, Levi S, Livne T. Do firms underreport information on cyber-attacks? Evidence from capital markets. *Rev Account Stud* 2018;**23**:1177–206.
- 76. Coleman D. Nearly 65% of affected public companies did not report cybersecurity breaches to the SEC. *Audit Analytics Report*, 27 February 2018. [https://www.auditanalytics.com/blog/nearly-70-of-affected-public](https://www.auditanalytics.com/blog/nearly-70-of-affected-public-companies-did-not-report-cybersecurity-breaches-to-the-sec/) -companies-did-not-report-cybersecurity-breaches-to-the-sec/
- 77. Croce B. Majority of cybersecurity incidents go unreported to SEC, analysis finds. *Pensions & Investments* , 27 February 2019.

[https://www.pionline.com/article/20190227/ONLINE/190229852/major](https://www.pionline.com/article/20190227/ONLINE/190229852/majority-of-cybersecurity-incidents-go-unreported-to-sec-analysis-finds) ity-of-cybersecurity-incidents-go-unreported-to-sec-analysis-finds

<span id="page-16-7"></span>78. Hilary G, Segal B, Zhang MH. Cyber-risk disclosure: who cares? Working Paper, Georgetown McDonough School of Business, No. 2852519, 2016.

## **Appendix A:** *T***-tests of subsamples' CAR differences**

**Third-party vs "Other" firms**. The difference in CARs is statistically significant than zero for event windows [−1,21] through [−1,80], indicating that CARs for third-party incident firms are more negative in this range of event windows.

**First-party vs Third-party firms**. The difference in CARs is statistically significant than zero for a majority of event windows between [−1,15] and [−1,75], indicating that CARs for third-party firms are more negative in this range of event windows. For longer event windows, the difference in CARs continues to be negative but non statistically significant.

**Small vs Large Third-party Firms**. The difference in CARs is statistically significant than zero for event windows between [−1,15] and [−1,130], indicating that CARs for small third-party firms are more negative in this range of event windows. For longer event windows, the difference in CARs continues to be negative but mostly non statistically significant.

<span id="page-16-5"></span>**Figure A.1:** T-test of CARs for third-party induced incident firms and all other firms.

<span id="page-17-0"></span>**Figure A.2:** T-test of CARs for first- and third-party firms in third-party induced incidents.

<span id="page-17-1"></span>**Figure A.3:** T-test of difference in CARs for small and large third-party firms.