Title: Internal control material weakness disclosure and misstatement duration

URL Source: blob://pdf/69efe367-dde5-4f67-a801-a73d420a04d4

Markdown Content:
Received: 8 July 2018 Revised: 15 April 2022 Accepted: 17 April 2022 DOI: 10.1111/jbfa.12613 

A R T I C L E Internal control material weakness disclosure and misstatement duration Juan Mao Zhongxia (Shelly) Ye 

Department of Accounting, The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, USA 

Correspondence 

Juan Mao, Department of Accounting, The University of Texas at San Antonio, TX, USA. Email: juan.mao@utsa.edu An earlier version of this paper was titled “The Impact of Internal Control Material Weakness Disclosure on the Duration of Misstatements: Evidence from family and non-family firms in the U.S.” 

## Abstract 

Only a small proportion of companies that announce restatements disclose existing internal control material weaknesses (ICMWs) over financial reporting during mis-statement periods. Using a sample of 1939 restatements related to misstatements between 2003 and 2015, we find that misstatement duration decreases with the disclosure of ICMWs during misstatement periods. Our results are robust to different samples and different measures of the dependent and test variables. We also find that the number of ICMWs disclosed is negatively related to misstatement duration. The disclosure of both entity-level and process-level ICMWs is associated with misstatements of shorter duration. Moreover, we find that the negative association between ICMW disclosure frequency and misstatement duration is more salient when restatements are intentional. Despite the negative consequences of reporting existing ICMWs found in prior studies, our results suggest that the disclosure of ICMWs can shorten the duration of mis-statement periods, leading to more timely improvement in financial reporting. Hence, our evidence provides context and complements prior research suggesting that companies are penalized for disclosing ICMWs. 

K E Y W O R D S 

internal control material weakness, misstatements, restatements, Sarbanes–Oxley Act, Section 302, Section 404(a), Section 404(b) 

J E L C L A S S I F I C AT I O N 

G32, M41 

118 © 2022 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. J Bus Fin Acc. 2023;50:118–151. wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jbfa MAO AND YE 119 

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

The Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB, 2004, para. 140) states that the “restatement of previously issued financial statements to reflect the correction of a misstatement” strongly signals the existence of an internal control material weakness (ICMW). Although timely detection and reporting of ICMWs are required by the Sarbanes– Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX; US House of Representatives, 2002), only a small proportion of companies that announce restatements disclose known ICMWs during misstatement periods, and this proportion appears to be declining over time (Rice & Weber, 2012). Our objective is to explore whether the disclosure of ICMWs during misstatement periods reduces the duration of misstatements. In other words, does the disclosure of ICMWs during misstatement periods lead to timelier discovery and disclosure of misstatements? We have two primary motivations for answering this research question. First, it is critical for companies to correct misstatements promptly. When a misstatement period lasts longer, the number of investors who suffer increases, as do their losses. Prior studies have used misstatement duration to measure misstatement severity (He et al., 2019; Hogan et al., 2013; Palmrose et al., 2004; Rice et al., 2015). They find negative consequences stemming from a long misstate-ment duration, including adverse market reactions to restatement announcements, restatement-related litigations, class action lawsuits, Accounting and Auditing Enforcement Releases (AAERs) issued by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and Chief Financial Officer (CFO) turnover. In addition, Singer and Zhang (2018, p.317), the first researchers to explore the determinants of misstatement duration 1 state: “The timely discovery of misstatements by an auditor is of great importance to companies and market investors, not only because it prevents misstatements from exacerbating but also because it helps investors to promptly adjust their valuation, resulting in a lower likelihood of extreme stock price volatility and stock price crashes.” Singer and Zhang (2018) call for additional research on other determinants of misstatement duration. We address this important issue. Second, although it is essential to understand the consequences of the timely reporting of ICMWs, knowledge in this area remains limited. Only two other studies have examined the consequences of timely reporting of ICMWs. Rice et al. (2015) find that companies that reported ICMWs under SOX Section 404(b) during misstatement periods are more likely to have restatement-related class-action lawsuits, AAERs issued by the SEC, management turnover and auditor resignations after restatements. Moreover, He et al. (2019) find that market reactions to restatement announcements are more adverse for timely ICMW reporters (companies that disclose ICMWs before restatements )than for late ICMW reporters (companies that disclose ICMWs concurrent with or after restatements ). They also find that more lawsuits are dismissed, and settlement amounts are lower for timely reporters than for late reporters. There-fore, the prior evidence largely suggests that penalties are more probable for companies that report their ICMWs on a timely basis. In contrast, the PCAOB (2015, p.13) proposes “timely reporting of internal control weaknesses” as one of 28 potential audit quality indicators, suggesting that the PCAOB considers timely disclosure as beneficial. A lack of complete knowledge of the consequences of the timely reporting of ICMWs may serve as a disincentive for compa-nies and auditors to detect and report ICMWs on a timely basis. Thus, we address this need for additional evidence following Rice et al.’s (2015) suggestion. The PCAOB (2007, para. A7) defines an ICMW as “a deficiency, or combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting, so that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the company’s annual or interim financial statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis .” It highlights the importance of internal controls in preventing and detecting material misstatements in financial reporting in a timely manner. SOX Sections 302 and 404 internal control reports are designed to provide early warnings of internal control problems. There are three conditions under which a company discloses an ICMW in Section 302 or Section 404 internal control reports: (1) the ICMW exists, (2) either or both management and the auditor are aware of it and assess it as warranting disclosure, and (3) either or both management and the auditor choose to report. Since our sample consists of companies with misstatements, the disclosure of ICMWs within misstatement periods suggests timely detection and reporting. 1 Singer and Zhang (2018) focus on the effect of auditor tenure on misstatement duration while controlling for company characteristics and ownership in their model specification. 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 120 MAO AND YE 

Companies that disclose ICMWs during misstatement periods may have misstatements of shorter duration for two reasons. First, after the disclosure, management has an incentive to remediate the ICMWs because of the increased public scrutiny and the positive correlation between managers’ compensation and internal control quality (Hoitash et al., 2012; Khurana & Kyung, 2021). 2 Second, the detection of ICMWs signals the possibility of potential financial misstatements, leading to heightened vigilance on the part of management and auditors. For instance, evidence from previous studies suggests, according to the audit risk model, that auditors increase efforts and adjust their substantive audit procedures when control risk is high (e.g., Hoag & Hollingsworth, 2011; Hogan & Wilkins, 2008; Seidel, 2017). 3Nevertheless, after disclosing the ICMWs, companies may not be able to remediate them immediately for various rea-sons, such as high remediation costs or a lack of strong corporate governance (Goh, 2009; Hammersley et al., 2012; Johnstone et al., 2011; Liu & Liu, 2017). In addition, the ICMWs disclosed early may be more severe and difficult to remediate (Goh, 2009). These possibilities introduce tension to our research question. Hence, whether the disclosure of existing ICMWs during misstatement periods is associated with misstatements of shorter duration is an empirical question. Following Singer and Zhang (2018), we use accelerated failure time parametric duration models in our main anal-yses. We also add our test variables and proxies for restatement severity to the models. We use a sample of 1939 restatements that affect the annual reports of both accelerated 4 and non-accelerated filers (whole sample) and a sam-ple of 1095 restatements that affect the annual reports of only accelerated filers (404(b) sample). We also conduct tests on only material restatements (i.e., reissuance restatements) from these two samples. We refer to these two samples of material restatements as the big R-whole sample and the big R-404(b) sample. The dependent variable is misstatement duration, measured by the natural logarithm of the number of consec-utive fiscal years misstated. The test variable for the whole sample and the big R-whole sample is the frequency of ICMW disclosure under Section 302, 404(a), or 404(b), averaged during the misstatement period. The test variable for the 404(b) sample and the big R-404(b) sample is the frequency of ICMW disclosure under Section 404(b), averaged during the misstatement period. Our results from these four samples provide solid and consistent evidence that the disclosure of ICMWs during misstatement periods is negatively associated with misstatement duration. We also find that some proxies for restatement severity are positively related to misstatement duration. Hence, the disclosure of ICMWs during misstatement periods is incremental to other restatement severity variables. We perform several robustness tests. Our results are substantially unchanged when we perform the following tests separately: (a) use months (or days) instead of years to calculate misstatement duration, (b) replace the continuous dependent variable with a binary variable indicating whether the number of misstatement years is greater than one, (c) redefine the test variables as indicator variables for ICMW disclosure in the first misstatement year, (d) expand the sample to include restatements that affect only quarterly reports, (e) use entropy-balanced samples, and (f) use propensity-score-matched samples. Furthermore, we find that the number of ICMWs disclosed is negatively related to misstatement duration. In addition, the disclosure of both entity-level and process-level ICMWs is associated with misstatements of shorter duration. Moreover, the negative association between ICMW disclosure frequency and mis-statement duration is stronger for intentional restatements than for unintentional ones. Our tests differ from those of studies that examine restatement timeliness. The misstatement duration that we examine lasts from the beginning to the end of the misstatement period. In contrast, restatement timeliness relates to the number of days between the end of the misstatement period and the restatement announcement date (Hirschey et al., 2015). In addition, our approach is distinct from studies that examine the association between the disclosure of ICMWs and restatement frequency. Restatement frequency refers to the possibility or the frequency of issuing a restatement, while misstatement duration indicates how long the misstatement related to the restatement lasts. 2 Consistent with this conjecture, we find univariate evidence in an untabulated analysis that remediation time (in days) is shorter following more timely ICMW disclosures. 3 We thank an anonymous reviewer for this suggestion. 4 We refer to accelerated filers as companies with a public float of $75 million or more. 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License MAO AND YE 121 

Some studies (e.g., Feng & Li, 2010; Nagy, 2010; Srinivasan et al., 2015) find that, compared to companies that do not disclose ICMWs, companies that do disclose are more likely to misreport (usually reflected in more restatements and more severe ones). The non-disclosure of ICMWs in these studies could be because ICMWs do not exist, companies and auditors have not found ICMWs, or companies and auditors choose not to disclose ICMWs. However, we examine ICMW disclosure only within misstatement periods when ICMWs arguably exist. Unlike these studies, we find that companies that disclose ICMWs when they do exist have a shorter misstatement duration. Thus, better assessment of internal controls over financial reporting leads to more timely improvement in financial reporting. Our analyses make significant contributions to the literature and provide policy implications for regulators. First, we extend the literature on determinants of misstatement duration (Singer & Zhang, 2018) by finding a significant role of ICMW disclosure. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first researchers to provide robust evidence on the association between the disclosure of ICMWs during misstatement periods and misstatement duration. The evidence from a univariate analysis by He et al. (2019) suggests that timely ICMW reporters (companies that disclose ICMWs 

before restatements ) have a shorter misstatement duration than non-timely ICMW reporters (companies that disclose ICMWs concurrent with or after restatements ). Our analyses relate to their evidence and make incremental contribu-tions. Although it appears that the univariate test of He et al. (2019) also addresses the association between the time-liness of ICMW reporting and misstatement duration, He et al. (2019) define reporting as timely as long as an ICMW is reported in any of the four quarters before a restatement. However, our study examines the timeliness and frequen-cies of ICMW disclosure anytime during the misstatement period . ICMW disclosures after the end of the misstatement period and within four quarters before the restatement are regarded as timely ICMW reporting by He et al. (2019) but should not affect misstatement duration. In addition, unlike He et al. (2019), we perform a series of analyses in a mul-tiple regression framework controlling for factors that can affect misstatement duration. Finally, we provide evidence on how the severity of ICMWs disclosed and the severity of restatements affect this association. Second, we are the first researchers to provide empirical evidence that some measures of restatement sever-ity (including the total number of issues reported in the restatement, restatements related to revenue recognition, restatements related to fraud, and restatements with SEC involvement) lengthen misstatement duration. This evi-dence should be of importance to companies that intend to improve their financial reporting. Third, we add to the limited research on the consequences of timely ICMW disclosures. The consequences of timely ICMW disclosures that He et al. (2019) and Rice et al. (2015) find are mainly negative ones around or after restatements ,while our study finds a benefit before the end of misstatements . Our results may motivate companies to detect and report ICMWs on a timely basis if they intend to accelerate the improvements to their financial reporting. Moreover, due to the positive association between the length of the misstatement duration and the severity of adverse consequences of a restatement (He et al., 2019; Hogan et al., 2013; Palmrose et al., 2004; Rice et al., 2015), timely disclosure of ICMWs can offset the harm of a restatement by shortening the misstatement duration before the restatement .Finally, our results have policy implications. We find that companies whose auditors disclose ICMWs under Section 404(b) during misstatement periods have a shorter duration of misstatements. Therefore, reporting an ICMW when one likely exists indicates higher quality audit reporting and stronger auditor independence because doing so can speed up the process of improving the client’s financial reporting. Hence, our empirical evidence corroborates the PCAOB’s proposal that timely reporting of ICMWs could be used as an indicator of audit quality. 

## 2 BACKGROUND AND HYPOTHESIS DEVELOPMENT 2.1 Background on ICMW disclosure 

SOX Sections 302, 404(a) and 404(b) require public companies to provide timely ICMW disclosures. Section 302 is effective for quarterly and annual reports covering periods that end after August 29, 2002. It requires Chief Exec-utive Officers (CEOs) and CFOs of all public companies to certify in each quarterly or annual report that they have 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 122 MAO AND YE 

presented the conclusion of their evaluation of the effectiveness of internal controls in a report as of a date within 90 days before the report. Section 404(a) requires companies to include a management assessment of the effective-ness of their internal controls in their annual reports, and Section 404(b) requires them to also include an external auditor’s attestation of that effectiveness. Accelerated filers are subject to the requirements of Sections 404(a) and 404(b) for annual reports for fiscal years ending on or after November 15, 2004 (SEC, 2004b). Non-accelerated fil-ers are mandated to comply with Section 404(a) for annual reports for fiscal years ending on or after December 15, 2007 (SEC, 2006), but are exempted by the Dodd–Frank Act of 2010 5 from the auditor attestation requirement of Section 404(b). In addition, emerging growth companies are exempted by the JOBS Act of 2012 6 from Section 404(b). According to SEC Rule 10(b) -5 (17 CFR §240.10(b) -5), failure to disclose ICMWs is a violation of the law. For an ICMW to be reported, three conditions must be met: (1) the ICMW must exist, (2) either or both a company and the auditor must be aware of the problem and assess it as an ICMW that warrants disclosure, and (3) either or both a company and the auditor must decide to report the ICMW. Even with the requirements from regulators, com-panies may deliberately choose not to disclose ICMWs to avoid negative consequences, such as a higher cost of equity (Ogneva et al., 2007), a higher cost of debt (Kim et al., 2011), and director and CFO turnover (Goh & Li, 2013; Li et al., 2010). Moreover, evaluation of the effectiveness of internal controls involves inherent difficulties and a high degree of judgment (Rice et al., 2015). Hence, companies that did not disclose existing ICMWs may argue that they were not aware of them or that the internal control problems they found did not rise to the level of material weaknesses. How-ever, if the external auditor independently assesses and reports ICMWs under Section 404(b), the auditor can disclose the ICMWs, even if the company chooses not to. 

## 2.2 Research on ICMW disclosure during misstatement periods 

According to PCAOB (2004), the restatement of previously issued financial statements strongly signifies the existence of an ICMW during the corresponding misstatement periods. However, studies consistently find underreporting of ICMWs during periods of misstatements that are subsequently corrected (e.g., He et al., 2019; Rice & Weber, 2012; Rice et al., 2015). Rice and Weber (2012) examine 488 accelerated filers that announced restatements emerging from ICMWs. Those restatements were announced by the end of 2009 with misstatement periods after November 15, 2004. They find that, on average, only 32.4% of these companies report existing ICMWs under Section 404(b) during misstatement periods and that this percentage declines from 35.4% to 13.6% over their 5-year sample period. In addition, the likelihood of reporting ICMWs during misstatement periods is positively related to prior restatements, the previous disclosure of ICMWs under Section 302, whether the company reports a loss, audit fees, auditor change and CEO or CFO change. This likelihood is negatively related to company size, subsequent financing activities, whether the Section 404 audit report is issued by a Big 4 auditor, non-audit fees and the number of years since the implementation of Section 404. Rice et al. (2015) study a sample of 659 accelerated filers who announced accounting restatements by the end of 2010, which include fiscal year-ends after November 15, 2004. Among these companies, 134 (20.33%) disclosed ICMWs during their misstatement periods, but the other 525 (79.67%) did not. They find that after restatements, com-panies that report ICMWs under Section 404(b) during misstatement periods are more likely to face class-action law-suits, management (both CEOs and CFOs) turnover and auditor resignations. They also find similar evidence, although weaker, for AAERs issued by the SEC. They argue: “These results are consistent with disclosure of control weaknesses making it difficult for management to plausibly claim later that they were unaware of the underlying conditions that led to restatements” (p.1169). 5 The Dodd–Frank Act of 2010 is available at https://www.congress.gov/bill/111th-congress/house-bill/4173/text. 6 JOBS Act of 2012 is available at https://www.congress.gov/112/plaws/publ106/PLAW-112publ106.pdf. It defines an emerging growth company as “an issuer that had total annual gross revenues of less than $1,000,000,000 during its most recently completed fiscal year” (SEC 101). 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License MAO AND YE 123 

He et al. (2019) classify the reporting of ICMWs as timely reporting (before restatements) and late or non-timely reporting (concurrent with or after restatements). Based on a sample of restatements issued between 2003 and 2013, they find that market reactions to restatements accompanied by an ICMW disclosure are more negative than stan-dalone restatements (without an ICMW disclosure). Market reactions are negative to restatements, regardless of the timeliness of the ICMW disclosure, but are more negative for timely reporters of ICMWs than for late reporters. In addition, compared with companies that issue standalone restatements, companies that announce restatements accompanied by an ICMW disclosure experience a greater increase in the implied volatility of options, a proxy for post-restatement uncertainty. However, the increase in post-restatement uncertainty is similar for timely and non-timely reporters of ICMWs. Also, companies that announce restatements accompanied by an ICMW disclosure are more likely to be sued than those that issue standalone restatements. The likelihood of being sued is equal for timely and late reporters of ICMWs. Nevertheless, more cases are dismissed, and settlement amounts are lower for timely reporters than for late reporters of ICMWs. 

## 2.3 Research on misstatement duration 

Singer and Zhang (2018) are the only other researchers who have investigated determinants of misstatement dura-tion. They focus on the effect of auditor tenure on misstatement duration. Based on a sample of 3465 accounting mis-statements from 2000 to 2013, they find that accounting misstatement duration (measured by the number of consec-utive annual reports misstated) is positively associated with auditor tenure. Moreover, this association exists before and after SOX, although it is weaker afterward. They also find that misstatement duration is positively related to com-pany size and negatively related to book-to-market ratio, whether a company has a loss, company restructuring and institutional ownership concentration. Some studies use misstatement duration as an independent variable in their models. For example, Palmrose et al. (2004) investigate market reactions to accounting restatements announced from 1995 to 1999. They use misstate-ment duration (named the number of years restated) as one of the proxies for the materiality of restatements. In one of their models, misstatement duration is significantly and negatively associated with the cumulative abnormal returns surrounding restatement announcements. When testing whether timely disclosure of ICMWs is associated with restatement-related litigation risk, Hogan et al. (2013) use misstatement duration as a control variable to measure the severity of misstatements. Their univari-ate analysis indicates that restatement-related litigations have longer misstatement periods. When comparing the consequences of disclosing ICMWs under Section 404(b) during misstatement periods ver-sus after restatements, Rice et al. (2015) use misstatement duration, one of their proxies for restatement severity, as a control variable. They find that duration is positively associated with several negative consequences following restatements: AAERs issued by the SEC, class action lawsuits and CFO turnover. Based on a sample of restatements issued between 2003 and 2013, He et al. (2019) use misstatement duration 7as a control variable when they test the consequences of the different timing of ICMW disclosure relative to restate-ment announcements. They find that misstatement duration is positively related to a class-action lawsuit filed against the company within one or two years following the restatement. Their univariate analysis suggests that timely ICMW reporters (companies that disclose ICMWs before restatements ) have a shorter misstatement duration than non-timely reporters (companies that disclose ICMWs concurrent with or after restatements ). To summarize, some researchers use misstatement duration to measure misstatement severity and report negative consequences stemming from a long misstatement duration. However, Singer and Zhang (2018) are the only other 7 The three studies as mentioned earlier use different terms in referring to the misstatement period. Hogan et al. (2013) refer to it as the “length of the misstatement,” Rice et al. (2015) call it the “number of years restated,” and He et al. (2019) refer to it as the “number of periods restated.” 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 124 MAO AND YE 

researchers who have examined determinants of misstatement duration, and they call for more research in this area. We provide salient evidence on this question. 

## 2.4 Research on the relation between ICMWs and restatement frequency 

Li and Wang (2006) find that, compared to companies with effective internal controls, companies with ICMWs (general and specific) are more likely to announce restatements in the future, and these restatements are more severe. In their univariate analysis, Hoitash et al. (2008) find that companies that disclose internal control problems are more likely to restate previously reported earnings in the current or next fiscal year. Based on sample companies surrounding the Section 404(b) compliance threshold ($75 million) for 2005 and 2006, Nagy (2010) finds that companies with ICMWs are more likely to have material misstatements in the same periods that were eventually restated. Feng and Li (2010) find that accelerated filers with ICMWs are more likely than those without ICMWs to have material misstatements from 2004 to 2007. Srinivasan et al. (2015) find that the association between restatement frequency and ICMWs is positive for US companies and foreign companies from countries with a strong rule of law but insignificant for compa-nies from countries with a weak rule of law. They conclude that less frequent restatements issued by US-listed foreign companies result from opportunistic reporting. These studies suggest that, except for companies from countries with a weak rule of law, companies with ICMWs are more likely to have accounting restatements, indicating poor financial reporting. The non-disclosure of ICMWs in these studies could be because ICMWs do not exist, companies and auditors have not found ICMWs or companies and auditors have chosen not to disclose ICMWs. Unlike these studies, we examine ICMW disclosure only within mis-statement periods when ICMWs arguably exist. Therefore, we use a sample of companies that announce restatements, while these studies generally use samples consisting of both restated and non-restated companies. 

## 2.5 Hypothesis development 

Companies that disclose ICMWs during misstatement periods may have misstatements of shorter duration for the following two reasons. First, timely disclosure of ICMWs may result in more timely remediation of ICMWs because managers of companies with ICMWs face more scrutiny from the public, the audit committee and other parties (Khu-rana & Kyung, 2021). Studies find that companies reporting ICMWs have a higher cost of debt and equity (Kim et al., 2011; Ogneva et al., 2007). Hence, managers are motivated to remediate ICMWs to acquire capital at a lower cost. In addition, effective audit committees and boards of directors encourage managers to remediate ICMWs (Goh, 2009). Managers also have strong incentives to remediate ICMWs for their own interests, as their compensation is closely tied to internal control quality (Hoitash et al., 2012). The process and results of remediating ICMWs reduce the like-lihood of potential financial misstatements and contribute to a shorter misstatement duration. Second, the detection of ICMWs signals potential financial misstatements. Hence, management becomes more vigilant in detecting and cor-recting them. Auditors may also exercise more professional skepticism, increase efforts, and adjust their substantive audit procedures when control risk is high (e.g., Hoag & Hollingsworth, 2011; Hogan & Wilkins, 2008; Seidel, 2017). Therefore, the misstatement duration can be shortened after ICMWs are detected. Conversely, even after ICMWs are disclosed, some companies may not be able to remediate ICMWs on a timely basis for various reasons, such as high remediation costs, a lack of expertise or weak corporate governance (Goh, 2009; Hammersley et al., 2012; Johnstone et al., 2011; Liu & Liu, 2017). Moreover, managers may not be willing to divert time and resources from core businesses to internal controls because their compensation is more closely tied to company performance than to internal control quality (Goh, 2009). In addition, managers may not be willing to reme-diate ICMWs because they have a greater chance of being opportunistic when ICMWs exist (Goh, 2009). For example, only about 60% to 70% of companies that report internal control problems remediate them in the subsequent year 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License MAO AND YE 125 

(Johnstone et al., 2011; Liu & Liu, 2017). Also, ICMWs disclosed early may be more severe and difficult to remediate (Goh, 2009). As ICMWs persist, it is difficult for companies to detect and correct financial misreporting. These possi-bilities introduce tension to our research question. Hence, whether ICMW disclosure during misstatement periods is associated with a shorter misstatement duration is an empirical question. Based on these competing arguments, we present the hypothesis in the null form: 

H1 : There is no association between the disclosure of ICMWs during misstatement periods and the duration of misstatements. 

## 3 MODELS, SAMPLES AND DATA 3.1 Models 

We follow Singer and Zhang (2018) and use four accelerated failure time parametric duration models in our main anal-yses to test our hypothesis. The following model is for the sample consisting of restatements by both accelerated and non-accelerated filers (whole sample): 

FYEAR _MIS = ?? + ?? 1ICMW _OVERALL + ?? 2LN _AUDTENURE + ?? 3LN _NAF 

+ ?? 4LNASSET + ?? 5LEV + ?? 6BTM + ?? 7LOSS + ?? 8ROA + ?? 9RESTRUCTURE 

+ ?? 10 LN _FIRMAGE + ?? 11 GEOSEGNUM + ?? 12 BUSSEGNUM + ?? 13 BIG 4

+ ?? 14 TACC + ?? 15 INST _PERC + ?? 16 INST _HHI + ?? 17 NUM _ISSUES _MIS 

+ ?? 18 REV _RES + ?? 19 RES _NEGEFFECT + ?? 20 RS _402 + ?? 21 FRAUD 

+ ?? 21 SEC + Year indicators + Industry indicators + "

. (1a) Please see the Appendix for variable definitions. The dependent variable is misstatement duration ( FYEAR_MIS ). It is natural-logarithm-transformed in the model specifications of the survival analysis. Following Singer and Zhang (2018), we define FYEAR_MIS as the number of consecutive annual financial statements misstated. FYEAR_MIS equals 1 when one annual financial statement was misstated, 2 when two consecutive annual financial statements were misstated and so on. Because our dependent variable is the duration of a misstatement, we perform survival analyses assuming that misstatement duration follows a lognormal distribution (Singer & Zhang, 2018). Our test variable in Model (1a) is ICMW_OVERALL , the average frequency of the ICMW disclosure under Section 302, 404(a), or 404(b) during the misstatement period. We follow two steps to construct ICMW_OVERALL . First, for each misstatement year, we code ICMWALL as 1 if one or more ICMWs are reported under Section 302, 404(a), or 404(b) in fiscal year t and 0 otherwise. Then, ICMW_OVERALL is the average of ICMWALL across all misstatement years. 

ICMW_OVERALL ranges from 0 to 1, with 1 indicating that a company discloses ICMWs in all misstatement years and 0 indicating no disclosure of ICMWs in any misstatement year. Therefore, the larger ICMW_OVERALL is, the more fre-quently a company reports ICMWs during misstatement years. We include all control variables used by Singer and Zhang (2018). These control variables are measured as the average during the misstatements period. Based on the results of Singer and Zhang (2018), we expect LN_AUDTENURE 

(auditor tenure) to have a positive coefficient. Knowledge spillover due to non-audit services can help the auditor detect misstatements, but detection may be slower if non-audit services impair auditor independence. Hence, we do not predict a sign for the coefficient of LN_NAF (non-audit fees paid to the external auditor). Singer and Zhang (2018) find a positive association between company size and misstatement duration, possibly because detecting mis-statements in companies with complex operations is more challenging. Therefore, we expect LNASSET (company size measured by total assets) , GEOSEGNUM (number of geographic segments), and BUSSEGNUM (number of business segments) to have positive coefficients. Singer and Zhang (2018) do not find leverage associated with misstatement 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 126 MAO AND YE 

duration. However, some researchers (e.g., Dechow et al., 2011) argue that obtaining financing motivates management to misstate financial statements. Hence, we predict a positive coefficient of LEV (total liabilities divided by total assets). Also, we expect the coefficient of BTM (book-to-market ratio) to be negative since Singer and Zhang (2018) find com-pany growth to be positively related to misstatement duration. LOSS (an indicator variable for a company reporting a loss), ROA (return on assets), and RESTRUCTURE (an indicator variable for a company undergoing restructuring activ-ities) proxy for company performance. Poorly performing companies are expected to have a shorter misstatement duration because their financial reporting quality is under scrutiny (Singer & Zhang, 2018). Singer and Zhang (2018) find that reporting a loss and restructuring activities are negatively associated with misstatement duration. Therefore, we expect the coefficients of LOSS , ROA and RESTRUCTURE to be negative, positive, and negative, respectively. Singer and Zhang (2018) include company age in their model because Lennox and Pittman (2010) find that older companies are less likely to have misstatements. Hence, we expect LN_FIRMAGE (company age) to have a negative coefficient. We predict the coefficient of BIG4 (an indicator variable for the appointment of a Big 4 auditor) to be negative because higher-quality auditors detect misstatements faster. TACC (total accruals divided by average total assets), a measure of misstatement scale, is expected to have a negative coefficient since it is easier to detect larger misstatement amounts. 

INST_PERC (institutional ownership) and INST_HHI (institutional ownership concentration) can affect earnings qual-ity in different directions (Velury & Jenkins, 2006). Institutional shareholders have incentives and capabilities to moni-tor financial reporting (active monitoring hypothesis). Nevertheless, large institutional shareholders may exploit com-panies’ private information to which they have access and thus may not encourage companies to provide high-quality financial reporting (private benefits hypothesis). Velury and Jenkins (2006) find that earnings quality is positively related to institutional ownership but negatively related to concentrated institutional ownership. Singer and Zhang (2018) find that institutional ownership concentration is negatively related to misstatement duration but that institu-tional ownership is not associated with misstatement duration. Therefore, we do not predict signs for the coefficients of INST_PERC and INST_HHI .In addition, we include proxies for the severity of misstatements. NUM_ISSUES_MIS (total number of issues identi-fied in a restatement) measures the pervasiveness of misstatements. The indicator variables for restatements related to revenue recognition issues and restatements with an income-decreasing effect, respectively, are REV_RES and 

RES_NEGEFFECT . RS_402 is an indicator variable for reissuance restatements (restatements disclosed in Item 4.02 of an 8-K filing). The SEC (2004a) requires a public company to disclose a restatement within four business days of detecting a misstatement in Section 4.02 of an 8-K filing if any of the company’s previously issued financial statements should not be relied on due to this misstatement. Therefore, the SEC considers reissuance restatements more severe and thus requires prompt disclosure. 8 FRAUD and SEC are indicator variables for restatements related to fraud and restatements with SEC involvement, respectively. Although severe misstatements may be easier to detect, managers may intentionally try to hide them. Hence, we do not predict signs for the coefficients of FRAUD and SEC . The model also includes industry and year fixed effects based on the first misstated year. Because of the long-standing controversies surrounding Section 404(b) (e.g., Fan et al., 2017), we also test our hypothesis for ICMW disclosure under Section 404(b) with a sample consisting of only restatements by accelerated filers (i.e., 404(b) sample). For this purpose, we revise Model (1a) to obtain Model (1b) by replacing ICMW_OVERALL 

with ICMW_SOX404b as the test variable. ICMW_SOX404b is defined as the average frequency of ICMW disclosure under Section 404(b) during the misstatement period. We also follow two steps to construct this variable. First, for each misstatement year, we code ICMW404b as 1 if one or more ICMWs are reported under Section 404(b) in fiscal year t and 0 otherwise. Then, ICMW_SOX404b is the average of ICMW404b across all misstatement years. Since restatements in the big R-whole sample and the big R-404(b) sample are all reissuance restatements (RS_402 = 1), we delete variable RS_402 from Model (1a) to obtain Model (1c) for the big R-whole sample. Similarly, we remove RS_402 from Model (1b) to obtain Model (1d) for the big R-404(b) sample. 8 Some researchers classify restatements as reissuance restatements or revision restatements (Hogan & Jonas, 2016). Reissuance restatements are reported in Section 4.02 of an 8-K filing, and revision restatements are disclosed in 10-K, 10-K/A, 10-Q, or 10-Q/A filings. 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License MAO AND YE 127 

## 3.2 Sample selection and distribution 

The first column in Panel A of Table 1 presents our sample selection process for the whole sample and the 404(b) sample. Our unit of analysis is each restatement. Our initial sample consists of 11796 accounting restatements with misstatement periods covering fiscal years from 2003 to 2015. We end our sample with the fiscal year 2015 because it takes 2 to 3 years to discover a typical misstatement (Feng & Li, 2010). We then follow Singer and Zhang (2018) and remove the following restatements: (1) 2304 restatements with auditor change(s) in misstatement peri-ods, (2) 382 restatements caused by clerical errors, (3) 3241 restatements by companies not covered by Compu-stat, (4) 1223 restatements by financial and utility companies (Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) 6000 -6999 and SIC 4000 -4999, respectively), (5) three restatements by companies with zero audit fees in misstatement periods and (6) 137 restatements by companies with auditor tenure longer than 30 years in misstatement periods. Restate-ments related to lease accounting could result from the misinterpretation of generally accepted accounting princi-ples relating to operating leases rather than the existence of ICMWs. Hence, we exclude 66 restatements related to lease accounting. Also, because the disclosure of ICMWs during the misstatement period could be triggered by the restatement of financial statements resulting from another misstatement, we delete 776 restatements with at least one other restatement disclosed during the misstatement period. 9 This process creates a potential sample of 3664 restatements. As only annual reports are subject to Sections 404(a) and 404(b), companies with only misstated quarterly reports can provide ICMW disclosures only under Section 302. This difference can contribute to the ICMW disclosure frequency differences between companies with misstated annual reports and those with only misstated quarterly reports. Therefore, we remove 1335 restatements because their corresponding misstatements do not affect annual reports (i.e., only quarterly reports are misstated). 10 As a result, we have a potential sample of 2329 restatements with at least one annual report misstated. After excluding 390 restatements with missing data for other variables in the model, we obtain a final sample of 1939 restatements for Model 1(a) (whole sample, including all restatements by accelerated and non-accelerated filers). After deleting 844 restatements by non-accelerated filers from the whole sample, we obtain a final sample of 1095 restatements for Model 1(b) (404(b) sample, including all restatements by accelerated filers. The PCAOB states that “restatement of previously issued financial statements to reflect the correction of a mate-rial misstatement” is one of the indicators of ICMWs (PCAOB 2007, para. 69). To perform analyses on only material restatements (i.e., reissuance restatements), 11 we form the big R-whole sample (637 reissuance restatements from the whole sample) and the big R-404(b) sample (310 reissuance restatements from the 404(b) sample). The second column in Panel A of Table 1 reports the process leading to these two samples. As reported in Panel B of Table 1, the misstatement duration of the restatements in our sample ranges from one to five years. Over 90% of the restatements affect fewer than four years in both the restatement and material restatement samples. In addition, more than 55% of restatements and material restatements have only one misstated annual report. Panel C of Table 1 reports the distribution of restatements by the first fiscal year misstated. Mis-statements start most frequently in fiscal years 2003 and 2004. Untabulated information reveals that these restate-ments are announced most frequently in 2005 and 2006, consistent with what Audit Analytics reports (Coleman, 2017). 9 Our inferences are the same if we keep only the first restatement by companies with multiple restatements during the sample period or remove restate-ments by companies with multiple restatements within two years. 10 About 36% of restatements (1335 out of 3664) in our sample only affect quarterly reports. Similarly, Singer and Zhang (2018) report that about 35% of restatements in their final sample (1216 out of 3465) only affect quarterly reports. Unlike Singer and Zhang (2018), we do not include these 1335 restate-ments. As a sensitivity analysis, we re-perform the regressions with the expanded sample that retains the restatements that affect only quarterly reports. Our results are substantially the same. 11 We thank an anonymous reviewer for this suggestion. 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 128 MAO AND YE 

TA B L E 1 Sample selection and distributions 

Panel A: Sample selection process All restate-ments Big R restatements 

Accounting restatements with misstatement periods from 2003 to 2015 11796 4323 Restatements with auditor change(s) in misstatement periods (2304) (1115) Restatements caused by clerical errors (382) (154) Restatements by companies not covered by Compustat (3241) (1045) Restatements by financial and utility companies (1223) (384) Restatements by companies with zero audit fees in misstatement periods (3) (1) Restatements by companies with auditor tenure longer than 30 years in misstatement periods (137) (21) Restatements related to lease accounting (66) (41) Restatements with at least one other restatement disclosed during the misstatement period (776) (328) Potential sample 3664 1234 

Only quarterly reports are misstated (annual reports are not misstated) (1335) (518) Potential sample with at least one annual report misstated 2329 716 

Restatements with missing data for other variables in the model (390) (121) Final sample for Models (1a) and (1c) ( whole sample and big R-whole sample )

1939 637 

Restatements by non-accelerated filers (844) (327) Final sample for Models (1b) and (1d) ( 404(b) sample and big R-404(b) sample )

1095 310 Panel B: Sample distribution by number of consecutive fiscal years misstated Whole sample Big R-whole sample Number of consecutive fiscal years misstated Number of restatements (%) Number of restatements (%) 

1 1159 59.77 368 57.77 2 475 24.50 155 24.33 3 186 9.59 80 12.56 4 89 4.59 24 3.77 5 30 1.55 10 1.57 Total 1939 100 637 100 (Continues) 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License MAO AND YE 129 

TA B L E 1 (Continued) 

Panel C: Sample distribution by the first fiscal year misstated Whole sample Big R-whole sample First fiscal year misstated N (%) N (%) 

2003 219 11.29 98 15.38 2004 208 10.73 119 18.68 2005 138 7.12 60 9.42 2006 123 6.34 51 8.01 2007 129 6.65 48 7.54 2008 124 6.40 45 7.06 2009 134 6.91 50 7.85 2010 149 7.68 39 6.12 2011 163 8.41 37 5.81 2012 172 8.87 19 2.98 2013 140 7.22 27 4.24 2014 113 5.83 28 4.40 2015 127 6.55 16 2.51 Total 1939 100 637 100 

Note : Panel A reports the sample selection process. Big R restatements refer to material restatements (i.e., reissuance restate-ments; RS_ 402 = 1). Panel B reports the distribution by the number of consecutive fiscal years misstated for the whole sample and the big R-whole sample. Panel C reports the distribution by the first fiscal year misstated for the whole sample and the big R-whole sample. 

## 3.3 Data 

We obtained our data on restatements, internal controls, auditor tenure, auditor fees, Big 4 auditors, and auditor change from Audit Analytics. We also retrieved financial data from Compustat and institutional ownership data from the Thomson-Reuters Institutional Holdings (13F) Database. 

## 4 EMPIRICAL RESULTS 4.1 Univariate analysis 

Table 2 provides the descriptive statistics of the whole sample. 12 The mean of FYEAR_MIS (the number of consecu-tive annual reports misstated) is 1.636. 13 ICMW_OVERALL (the average frequency of ICMW disclosure under Section 302, 404(a), or 404(b) during the misstatement period) has a mean of 0.172. This low ICMW disclosure frequency is consistent with prior studies (e.g., Rice & Weber, 2012). As discussed previously, we include in our model all the independent variables from Singer and Zhang (2018). The means of most of these variables are very close to those 12 To reduce the influence of outliers, we winsorize all continuous variables in all models at the 1st and 99th percentiles of observations in the samples, except that we winsorize LN_NAF , LEV , and TACC at the 2.5th and the 97.5th percentiles because these variables are highly skewed. 13 This number is larger than 1.184, the mean of Duration (the same variable as our FYEAR_MIS ) reported in Table 2, Panel A, of Singer and Zhang (2018), because we do not include restatements that affect only quarterly reports. In contrast, Singer and Zhang (2018) include these restatements and code Duration 

as 0 for them. 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 130 MAO AND YE 

TA B L E 2 Descriptive statistics–whole sample ( N = 1939) 

Variable Mean Std. Dev. P25 Median P75 

FYEAR_MIS 1.636 0.941 1.000 1.000 2.000 

ICMW_OVERALL 0.172 0.359 0.000 0.000 0.000 

LN_AUDTENURE 1.885 0.743 1.386 1.946 2.485 

AUDTENURE 8.481 5.902 4.000 7.000 12.000 

LN_NAF 9.462 4.666 8.622 11.153 12.595 

LNASSET 5.170 2.805 3.470 5.555 7.238 

LEV 0.791 1.049 0.313 0.536 0.762 

BTM 0.446 1.168 0.142 0.394 0.761 

LOSS 0.473 0.475 0.000 0.333 1.000 

ROA -0.648 2.561 -0.187 0.006 0.060 

RESTRUCTURE 0.391 0.446 0.000 0.000 1.000 

LN_FIRMAGE 2.544 0.776 1.946 2.603 3.091 

GEOSEGNUM 2.083 2.212 0.000 1.000 3.000 

BUSSEGNUM 1.795 1.394 1.000 1.000 3.000 

BIG4 0.611 0.487 0.000 1.000 1.000 

TACC -0.259 0.692 -0.146 -0.061 -0.018 

INST_PERC 0.325 0.359 0.000 0.153 0.678 

INST_HHI 0.229 0.244 0.000 0.209 0.326 

NUM_ISSUES_MIS 2.035 1.174 1.000 2.000 3.000 

REV_RES 0.136 0.342 0.000 0.000 0.000 

RES_NEGEFFECT 0.825 0.380 1.000 1.000 1.000 

RS_402 0.329 0.470 0.000 0.000 1.000 

FRAUD 0.019 0.135 0.000 0.000 0.000 

SEC 0.073 0.260 0.000 0.000 0.000 

Note : This table reports the descriptive statistics of the variables in Model (1a) for the whole sample and of AUDTENURE 

(defined as auditor tenure by the end of fiscal year t). The Appendix provides definitions of all other variables. We winsorize all continuous variables at the 1st and 99th percentiles, except that we winsorize LN_NAF , LEV and TACC at the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles because these variables are highly skewed. reported by Singer and Zhang (2018). Auditor tenure has a mean of about 8.5 years. About 61% of the companies use a Big 4 auditor during misstatement periods. Also, the average amount of non-audit fees is $404,438. 14 On average, the companies have total assets of $2323 million, 15 a leverage ratio of 0.791, a book-to-market ratio of 0.446, a return-on-assets ratio of -0.648 and total accruals of -0.259. Moreover, the companies own an average of approximately two geographic and nearly two business segments. In addition, company age has a mean of about 13 years (untabulated). 16 Furthermore, on average, approximately 47% of the companies report a loss, and nearly 40% undergo restructurings. Also, institutional ownership has a mean of about 33%, and the average concentration of institutional ownership is 0.229. 14 This number is based on average non-audit fees before natural-logarithm transformation. 15 This number is based on average assets before natural-logarithm transformation. 16 Due to the skewness of this variable, we use the natural logarithm of company age instead of its raw form as do Singer and Zhang (2018). 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License MAO AND YE 131 

The next group of variables relates to restatements. The average number of issues reported in a restate-ment ( NUM_ISSUES_MIS ) is about two. Approximately 14% of restatements relate to revenue recognition problems (REV_RES ), and 83% of restatements reduce net income ( RES_NEGEFFECT ). Also, about 33% of restatements are reis-suance restatements ( RS_402 ), and 2% relate to fraud ( FRAUD ). Moreover, the SEC is involved in the process of around 7% of restatements ( SEC ). Table 3 reports Pearson correlations for variables used in Model 1(a). The correlation between FYEAR_MIS and 

ICMW_OVERALL is -0.146 ( p < 0.01), providing preliminary evidence that misstatement duration decreases with the average frequency of ICMW disclosure during misstatement periods. In addition, FYEAR_MIS is positively correlated with variables related to the auditor: auditor tenure ( LN_AUDTENURE ), non-audit fees ( LN_NAF ), and a Big 4 audi-tor ( BIG4 ). In terms of company characteristics, FYEAR_MIS is negatively correlated with company leverage ( LEV ) and reporting a loss ( LOSS ). FYEAR_MIS is also positively correlated with company size ( LNASSET ), return on assets ( ROA ), company age ( LN_FIRMAGE ), geographic segments ( GEOSEGNUM ), business segments ( BUSSEGNUM ), total accruals (TACC ), and institutional ownership ( INST_PERC ). Additionally, misstatement duration is positively correlated with four of the six proxies for the severity of misstatements ( NUM_ISSUES_MIS , REV_RES , FRAUD and SEC ). 17 

## 4.2 Regressions results 

Table 4 reports the regression results for all four models. Models (1a) and (1b) are for all restatements, while Mod-els (1c) and (1d) are for material restatements. The variable of interest is ICMW_OVERALL in Models (1a) and (1c) and 

ICMW_SOX404b in Models (1b) and (1d). The coefficient of the test variable ICMW_OVERALL is significantly negative in both Models (1a) (coefficient = - 0.107, p < 0.01) and (1c) (coefficient = - 0.129, p < 0.05), indicating that misstate-ment duration decreases with the average frequency of ICMW disclosure during misstatement periods. Because our dependent variable is natural-logarithm-transformed, the coefficient of -0.107 on ICMW_OVERALL indicates that the misstatement duration of companies that disclose ICMWs in all misstatement years ( ICMW_OVERALL = 1) is about 10% shorter than that of companies that do not disclose ICMWs in any misstatement year ( ICMW_OVERALL = 0). The coefficient of the test variable ICMW_SOX404b is also significantly negative ( p < 0.01) in Models (1b) and (1d). The coefficient of ICMW_SOX404b is -0.226 in Model (1b), indicating that the misstatement duration of companies that report ICMWs under Section 404(b) in all misstatement years ( ICMW_SOX404b = 1) is about 20% shorter than the misstatement duration of companies that do not report ICMWs under Section 404(b) in any misstatement year (ICMW_SOX404b = 0). Regarding control variables, consistent with Singer and Zhang (2018), LN_AUDTENURE (auditor tenure) is signifi-cantly positive in three of the four models. LNASSET (company size) is significantly positive in all models. BIG4 (Big 4 auditor) is significant and has the expected negative sign in Model (1b). In addition, INST_HHI (institutional ownership concentration) is significantly positive in Model (1b). In terms of variables related to restatements, NUM_ISSUES_MIS (the number of issues reported in the restatement) is significantly positive ( p < 0.10) in Models (1b) and (1d). REV_RES (restatements related to revenue recognition) is highly significant ( p < 0.01) and positive in both Models (1a) and (1b). However, RES_NEGEFFECT (restatements with an income-decreasing effect) and RS_402 (restatements disclosed in Item 4.02 of an 8-K filing) are not significant in any models. FRAUD (restatements related to fraud) is significantly positive ( p < 0.01 and p < 0.05) in both Models (1a) and (1b). SEC (restatements with SEC involvement) is significantly positive ( p < 0.05) in Models (1b) and (1d). Hence, we 17 Notably, the correlation of TACC and ROA is 0.83, but the variance inflation factors (VIFs) of these two variables are only 3.8 and 4.2. The VIFs of all other independent variables are also below 5, and the VIF of ICMW_OVERALL is only 1.205. We do not drop TACC and ROA in our analyses because Singer and Zhang (2018) include these two variables. Also, statisticians do not suggest dropping highly correlated variables for two reasons: (1) doing so can lead to bias, and (2) a high correlation between certain interdependent variables should be irrelevant to the estimation of other variables in the model (Wooldridge, 2009, pp.96–97). Moreover, the results remain substantially unchanged if we remove either or both variables from the models. 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 132 MAO AND YE 

> TA B L E 3  Correlations—whole Sample ( N = 1939)
> Variable  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  11
> 1 FYEAR_MIS  1.000 2 ICMW_OVERALL  -0.146  1.000 3 LN_AUDTENURE  0.125  -0.155  1.000 4 LN_NAF  0.164  -0.201  0.223  1.000 5 LNASSET  0.247  -0.241  0.265  0.537  1.000 6 LEV  -0.101  0.208  -0.055  -0.226  -0.496  1.000 7 BTM  0.033  -0.075  0.032  0.082  0.274  -0.496  1.000 8 LOSS  -0.157  0.200  -0.180  -0.275  -0.480  0.282  -0.140  1.000 9 ROA  0.120  -0.234  0.088  0.251  0.529  -0.739  0.292  -0.308  1.000 10  RESTRUCTURE  -0.017  0.061  -0.004  0.030  -0.018  0.140  -0.059  0.201  -0.094  1.000 11  LN_FIRMAGE  0.142  -0.162  0.498  0.279  0.337  -0.119  0.052  -0.249  0.169  0.017  1.000 12  GEOSEGNUM  0.126  -0.070  0.121  0.302  0.371  -0.196  0.115  -0.198  0.195  0.039  0.239
> 13  BUSSEGNUM  0.060  -0.039  0.093  0.187  0.255  -0.107  0.090  -0.146  0.130  0.069  0.214
> 14  BIG4  0.176  -0.240  0.311  0.477  0.673  -0.280  0.110  -0.328  0.305  0.016  0.227
> 15  TACC  0.135  -0.231  0.098  0.300  0.535  -0.703  0.344  -0.357  0.830  -0.137  0.208
> 16  INST_PERC  0.190  -0.199  0.298  0.348  0.549  -0.220  0.067  -0.352  0.233  0.010  0.299
> 17  INST_HHI  0.033  -0.030  0.028  0.104  0.132  -0.155  0.102  -0.091  0.167  -0.032  0.119
> 18  NUM_ISSUES_MIS  0.069  0.014  -0.010  0.048  0.048  -0.017  -0.005  -0.056  0.004  0.039  -0.027 19  REV_RES  0.112  -0.013  0.003  0.049  0.039  -0.055  0.011  -0.063  0.060  0.014  -0.017 20  RES_NEGEFFECT  0.019  -0.009  0.025  -0.004  -0.007  0.003  -0.013  -0.048  0.012  -0.038  -0.015 21  RS_402  0.025  0.052  -0.081  -0.035  -0.155  0.010  -0.059  0.081  0.008  0.022  -0.091
> 22  FRAUD  0.102  -0.005  -0.057  0.012  0.032  -0.020  0.017  -0.044  0.021  -0.041  -0.019 23  SEC  0.055  0.029  0.002  -0.035  -0.047  -0.008  0.020  0.042  -0.004  -0.016  -0.050
> (Continues) 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

MAO AND YE 133 

> TA B L E 3  (Continued)
> Variable  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23
> 12  GEOSEGNUM  1.000 13  BUSSEGNUM  0.164  1.000 14  BIG4  0.326  0.140  1.000 15  TACC  0.221  0.132  0.343  1.000 16  INST_PERC  0.264  0.126  0.503  0.256  1.000 17  INST_HHI  0.059  0.081  0.106  0.203  0.145  1.000 18  NUM_ISSUES_MIS  0.056  0.033  0.018  0.003  -0.015  -0.056  1.000 19  REV_RES  0.054  -0.034  0.032  0.053  0.063  -0.001  0.201  1.000 20  RES_NEGEFFECT  0.014  0.001  -0.010  -0.011  0.023  0.031  0.028  0.052  1.000 21  RS_402  -0.081  -0.008  -0.163  0.003  -0.154  -0.013  0.212  0.146  -0.059  1.000 22  FRAUD  0.076  0.009  0.023  0.021  0.009  -0.005  0.133  0.102  0.053  0.083  1.000 23  SEC  -0.012  -0.021  -0.058  -0.004  -0.067  -0.031  0.061  0.075  0.046  0.240  0.094  1.000
> Note : This table reports the Pearson correlations for variables used in Model 1(a) for the whole sample. The Appendix provides variable definitions. Correlations in both bold and italics, in bold only and in italics only indicate significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10 levels, respectively. 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

134 MAO AND YE 

> TA B L E 4  Survival analysis results: Internal control material weakness (ICMW) disclosure frequency and misstatement duration
> All restatements  Big R restatements Model (1a)  Model (1b)  Model (1c)  Model (1d) Variable  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value
> Intercept  -0.057  0.721  0.239  0.423  -0.200  0.401  0.213  0.417
> ICMW_OVERALL  -0.107  ***  0.001  -0.129  **  0.011
> ICMW_SOX404b  -0.226  ***  0.000  -0.227  ***  0.008
> LN_AUDTENURE  0.025  0.133  0.048  * 0.054  0.084  ***  0.007  0.105  **  0.034
> LN_NAF  0.001  0.868  0.002  0.697  0.001  0.774  -0.004  0.615
> LNASSET  0.037  ***  < 0.0001  0.025 **  0.044  0.049  ***  0.000  0.054  **  0.029
> LEV  0.012  0.469  0.055  0.324  0.001  0.965  -0.001  0.996
> BTM  -0.012  0.242  -0.033  0.164  -0.017  0.355  -0.086  0.129
> LOSS  -0.033  0.206  -0.047  0.255  -0.057  0.184  -0.058  0.401
> ROA  -0.005  0.514  0.029  0.762  -0.016  0.257  -0.129  0.340
> RESTRUCTURE  -0.014  0.568  0.018  0.628  -0.031  0.460  -0.004  0.953
> LN_FIRMAGE  0.013  0.440  0.015  0.576  0.011  0.718  0.021  0.664
> GEOSEGNUM  0.002  0.770  -0.001  0.950  0.007  0.513  -0.008  0.546
> BUSSEGNUM  -0.005  0.495  -0.004  0.731  -0.017  0.237  -0.012  0.546
> BIG4  -0.035  0.258  -0.149 ***  0.002  -0.044  0.404  -0.078  0.339
> TACC  0.022  0.430  -0.182  0.242  0.013  0.774  -0.182  0.425
> INST_PERC  0.061  0.102  -0.074  0.124  0.027  0.711  -0.134  0.166
> INST_HHI  0.008  0.849  0.243  **  0.013  -0.076  0.283  0.124  0.517
> NUM_ISSUES_MIS  0.010  0.294  0.023  * 0.087  -0.001  0.970  0.043  * 0.052
> REV_RES  0.112  ***  0.000  0.141 ***  0.001  0.058  0.235  0.070  0.324 (Continues) 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

MAO AND YE 135 

> TA B L E 4  (Continued)
> All restatements  Big R restatements Model (1a)  Model (1b)  Model (1c)  Model (1d) Variable  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value
> RES_NEGEFFECT  -0.005  0.865  -0.025  0.521  0.064  0.161  0.055  0.408
> RS_402  0.019  0.441  -0.052  0.202
> FRAUD  0.268  ***  0.001  0.253 **  0.014  0.096  0.346  0.003  0.985
> SEC  0.062  0.130  0.160 **  0.011  0.078  0.111  0.170  **  0.020 Year indicators  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes Industry indicators  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
> N 1939  1095  637  310 Log-likelihood  -1174  -731  -371  -179
> Note : This table reports the regressions based on four accelerated failure time parametric duration models with the four samples reported in Table 1, Panel A. The dependent variable
> FYEAR_MIS  is natural-logarithm-transformed in the model specifications of the survival analysis. The test variables are  ICMW_OVERALL  and  ICMW_SOX404b . Please see the Appendix for variable definitions and Table 1, Panel A, for sample details. ***  , **  and  * indicate significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10 levels, respectively, two-tailed. 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

136 MAO AND YE 

find evidence that misstatement pervasiveness, misstatements related to revenue recognition, misstatements related to fraud and misstatements with SEC involvement are all positively related to misstatement duration. 

## 4.3 Sensitivity analyses 

We perform a group of sensitivity analyses for all four models as follows: (1) we use different measures of the depen-dent variable, (2) we use different measures of the test variables, and (3) we expand the sample to include restatements that affect only quarterly reports. 18 4.3.1 Different measures of the dependent variable It may be more precise to measure misstatement duration by months instead of fiscal years. Hence, we re-estimate all four models after replacing FYEAR_MIS with MONTHS_MIS (the number of consecutive months in the misstatement period). Similar to FYEAR_MIS , MONTHS_MIS is natural-logarithm-transformed in model specifications. The regression results (untabulated) indicate that both ICMW_OVERALL and ICMW_SOX404b are significantly negative ( p < 0.01 or 

p < 0.05) in the regressions, consistent with the results from our main analyses. 19 As reported in Panel B of Table 1, the majority (more than 55%) of the restatements in the whole sample and the big R-whole sample have only one fiscal year misstated. The continuous dependent variable can produce biased esti-mates. 20 To address this concern, we perform the logistic regressions for all four samples after replacing the depen-dent variable FYEAR_MIS with a binary variable DFYEAR_MIS (defined as 1 if the number of consecutive annual financial statements misstated is greater than 1 and 0 otherwise). In these four regressions, the definitions of the test variables are the same as those in the main models. 21 Both ICMW_OVERALL and ICMW_SOX404b are significantly negative in all four regressions (untabulated), consistent with the results from our main analyses. 4.3.2 Different measures of test variables To this point, we have provided evidence that frequent disclosure of ICMWs during misstatement periods shortens misstatement duration. Similarly, we expect that disclosure of ICMWs at the beginning of a misstatement period is associated with a shorter misstatement duration. We re-estimate all four models with the test variables measured as indicator variables for the disclosure of ICMWs in the first misstatement year ( ICMWALL1 for disclosure under SOX Section 302, 404(a), or 404(b), and ICMW404b1 for disclosure under SOX 404(b)). All other independent variables are measured for the first misstatement year. Both test variables are highly significant ( p < 0.01) and negative in all four regressions (untabulated), consistent with our prediction. 4.3.3 Expand the sample to include restatements that affect only quarterly reports In this analysis, we add back to our sample the restatements that affect only quarterly reports (i.e., annual reports are not misstated) and measure all independent variables in the first year of the misstatement period. Following Singer 18 Our untabulated analysis indicates that whether the misstatement beginning and end dates match the fiscal year’s beginning and end dates does not affect our inferences. 19 Our results are substantially similar if we replace FYEAR_MIS with DAYS_MIS (the number of consecutive days in the misstatement period). In the whole sample, DAYS_MIS (MONTHS_MIS ) has a mean of 654 days (21 months). 20 We thank an anonymous reviewer for this insight. 21 We re-conduct these four regressions after redefining all independent variables, including test variables, based on data in the first misstatement year. Our inferences remain the same. 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License MAO AND YE 137 

and Zhang (2018), for restatements that affect only quarterly reports, we measure independent variables in the fiscal year of these misstated quarterly reports and set the misstated year as zero. The dependent variable in this analysis is 

FYEAR_MIS2 . To obtain FYEAR_MIS2 , we add one to FYEAR_MIS due to the natural-logarithm transformation require-ment for the restatements that affect only quarterly reports. Both test variables ICMW_OVERALL and ICMW_SOX404b 

are significantly negative in all four regressions (untabulated). Hence, the results with the expanded samples substan-tially resemble those from our main analyses. 4.3.4 Other sensitivity tests We also perform the following sensitivity analyses: (1) Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions, in which the number of fiscal years misstated is a continuous variable; (2) Poisson regressions, in which the number of fiscal years misstated is a count; and (3) a redefinition of the test variables based on ICMWs reported under Section 404(a) or Section 302, separately. Our results (untabulated) remain qualitatively similar. 

## 4.4 Addressing the endogeneity concern 

We use entropy balancing to address the concern that companies that disclose ICMWs during misstatement peri-ods may be inherently different from companies that do not. We first perform entropy balancing for each of the four samples used in the main analyses reported in Table 4. The treatment group consists of restatements of companies that disclose at least one ICMW during the corresponding misstatement periods. The control group includes restate-ments of companies that do not disclose any ICMWs during the related misstatement periods. We reweight each observation in the control group through entropy balancing to obtain covariate balance on the means between the treatment group and the control group in each sample. We then perform the survival analyses with the four entropy-balanced samples. For brevity, we report in Table 5, Panel A, the means of control variables used in only Models (1a) and (1c) for the treatment groups and the control groups before and after the weighting (balancing). The con-trol variables in the treatment groups and the control groups have the same means after the weighting. Panel B of Table 5 indicates that our regression results are substantially similar to those from our main analyses reported in Table 4. 22 

## 4.5 Additional analyses 

## 4.5.1 The severity of ICMWs The disclosure of more severe ICMWs may help companies and their auditors realize the severity of potential prob-lems in their financial reporting. Hence, they may be more vigilant about the possibility of misstatements and thus detect and correct them more quickly. Moreover, since more severe ICMWs are more visible, it may be easier for com-panies and their auditors to detect misstatements related to more severe ICMWs. Therefore, we predict a negative association between the severity of ICMWs and misstatement duration. 22 To address the concern that some underlying agency issues and operating characteristics of the companies likely affect both the disclosure of ICMWs and the discovery of misstatements, we re-estimate all four models for our main analyses based on propensity-score-matched samples consisting of companies that disclose at least one ICMW during misstatement periods and companies that do not. When estimating the probability of disclosing at least one ICMW during the misstatement period, we follow Rice and Weber (2012) to construct our control variables and add three control variables: CEO duality, audit committee accounting expertise and institutional ownership. Our regression results with propensity-score-matched samples resemble those from our main analyses. 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 138 MAO AND YE 

> TA B L E 5  Addressing endogeneity issues
> Panel A: Descriptive statistics—entropy-balanced samples Whole sample ( N = 1939)  Big R-whole sample ( N = 637) Before weighting  After weighting  Before weighting  After weighting Treatment group  Control group  Treatment group  Control group  Treatment group  Control group  Treatment group  Control group Variable  Mean  Mean  Mean  Mean  Mean  Mean  Mean  Mean
> LN_AUDTENURE  1.682  1.937  1.682  1.682  1.691  1.835  1.691  1.691
> LN_NAF  7.899  9.862  7.899  7.899  8.241  9.559  8.241  8.241
> LNASSET  4.026  5.463  4.026  4.026  4.227  4.657  4.227  4.227
> LEV  1.163  0.696  1.163  1.163  0.977  0.749  0.977  0.977
> BTM  0.284  0.487  0.284  0.284  0.316  0.358  0.316  0.316
> LOSS  0.639  0.431  0.639  0.639  0.611  0.501  0.611  0.611
> ROA  -1.637  -0.395  -1.637  -1.637  -0.956  -0.507  -0.956  -0.956
> RESTRUCTURE  0.439  0.379  0.439  0.439  0.450  0.391  0.450  0.450
> LN_FIRMAGE  2.324  2.600  2.324  2.324  2.303  2.489  2.303  2.303
> GEOSEGNUM  1.911  2.127  1.911  1.911  1.905  1.803  1.905  1.905
> BUSSEGNUM  1.733  1.811  1.733  1.733  1.694  1.807  1.694  1.694
> BIG4  0.398  0.666  0.398  0.398  0.392  0.532  0.392  0.393
> TACC  -0.533  -0.189  -0.533  -0.533  -0.438  -0.197  -0.438  -0.437
> INST_PERC  0.195  0.358  0.195  0.195  0.194  0.263  0.194  0.195
> INST_HHI  0.220  0.231  0.220  0.220  0.209  0.229  0.209  0.209
> NUM_ISSUES_MIS  2.119  2.014  2.119  2.119  2.468  2.365  2.468  2.468
> REV_RES  0.134  0.136  0.134  0.134  0.196  0.211  0.196  0.196
> RES_NEGEFFECT  0.818  0.826  0.818  0.818  0.779  0.798  0.779  0.779
> RS_402  0.400  0.310  0.400  0.400 (Continues) 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

MAO AND YE 139 

> TA B L E 5  (Continued)
> Panel A: Descriptive statistics—entropy-balanced samples Whole sample ( N = 1939)  Big R-whole sample ( N = 637) Before weighting  After weighting  Before weighting  After weighting Treatment group  Control group  Treatment group  Control group  Treatment group  Control group  Treatment group  Control group Variable  Mean  Mean  Mean  Mean  Mean  Mean  Mean  Mean
> FRAUD  0.020  0.018  0.020  0.020  0.032  0.035  0.032  0.032
> SEC  0.089  0.069  0.089  0.089  0.146  0.167  0.146  0.146 (N = 395)  (N = 1544)  (N = 395)  (N = 1544)  (N = 158)  (N = 479)  (N = 158)  (N = 479)
> Panel B: Survival analyses–entropy-balanced samples All restatements  Big R restatements Model (1a)  Model (1b)  Model (1c)  Model (1d) Variable  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value
> Intercept  -0.065  0.651  0.223  0.235  -0.244  **  0.040  0.459  * 0.084
> ICMW_OVERALL  -0.164  ***  0.000  -0.183  ***  0.000
> ICMW_SOX404b  -0.256  ***  0.000  -0.270  ***  0.000
> LN_AUDTENURE  0.044  **  0.014  0.079  ***  0.005  0.112  ***  0.001  0.134  ***  0.009
> LN_NAF  0.003  0.278  0.000  0.938  0.003  0.516  -0.009  0.252
> LNASSET  0.039  ***  0.000  0.045  **  0.016  0.054  ***  0.000  0.058  * 0.075
> LEV  0.030  **  0.041  0.055  0.307  -0.016  0.545  -0.043  0.687
> BTM  -0.012  0.218  -0.040  * 0.071  -0.031  0.114  -0.093  * 0.062
> LOSS  -0.098  ***  0.001  -0.105  **  0.027  -0.051  0.218  -0.107  0.122
> ROA  -0.004  0.653  0.032  0.747  0.001  0.958  -0.098  0.563
> RESTRUCTURE  -0.024  0.304  -0.007  0.893  -0.035  0.366  -0.029  0.685
> LN_FIRMAGE  0.013  0.508  0.020  0.573  0.009  0.764  -0.019  0.709
> GEOSEGNUM  0.007  0.315  0.004  0.616  0.016  0.171  0.006  0.682 (Continues) 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

140 MAO AND YE 

> TA B L E 5  (Continued)
> Panel B: Survival analyses–entropy-balanced samples All restatements  Big R restatements Model (1a)  Model (1b)  Model (1c)  Model (1d) Variable  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value
> BUSSEGNUM  -0.010  0.339  -0.015  0.286  -0.012  0.457  -0.011  0.610
> BIG4  -0.064  * 0.088  -0.158  ***  0.008  -0.136  **  0.023  -0.198  * 0.057
> TACC  0.034  0.317  -0.107  0.498  -0.049  0.308  -0.206  0.465
> INST_PERC  0.073  0.164  -0.025  0.705  0.024  0.762  -0.066  0.492
> INST_HHI  -0.006  0.883  0.091  0.410  -0.078  0.232  -0.164  0.456
> NUM_ISSUES_MIS  0.014  0.231  0.022  0.242  0.002  0.882  0.051  **  0.029
> REV_RES  0.061  0.114  0.089  0.154  0.019  0.727  0.049  0.540
> RES_NEGEFFECT  0.001  0.971  -0.013  0.793  0.048  0.304  0.012  0.861
> RS_402  0.016  0.574  -0.057  0.276
> FRAUD  0.180  * 0.061  0.175  0.208  0.067  0.470  0.011  0.940
> SEC  0.002  0.970  0.115  * 0.094  0.026  0.619  0.170  **  0.031 Year indicators  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes Industry indicators  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
> N 1939  1095  637  310 Log pseudolikelihood  -54  189  -42  15
> Note : Panel A reports the descriptive statistics (means) of the control variables in Models (1a) and (1c) before and after the weighting (balancing) based on two entropy-balanced samples (whole sample and big R-whole sample). The treatment group consists of restatements of companies that disclose at least one ICMW under SOX Section 302, 404(a), or 404(b) during the corresponding misstatement periods, and the control group consists of all other restatements. This table indicates that the treatment group and the control group have the same means after weighting. Panel B reports the regressions based on four accelerated failure time parametric duration models with four entropy-balanced samples. We reweighted each observation in the control group through entropy balancing to obtain covariate balance on the means between the treatment group and the control group in each sample. The dependent variable  FYEAR_MIS  is natural-logarithm-transformed in the model specifications of the survival analysis. The test variables are  ICMW_OVERALL  and  ICMW_SOX404b . Please see the Appendix for variable definitions and Table 1, Panel A for sample details. ***  , **  and  * indicate significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10 levels, respectively, two-tailed. 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

MAO AND YE 141 

Our first proxy for ICMW severity is the number of ICMWs. More ICMWs indicate that ICMWs are more pervasive and thus more severe (Hermanson & Ye, 2009; Hsu & Liao, 2012; Ye et al., 2013). Since the data for the number of ICMWs are available for only Section 404 reports, we use the 404(b) sample and the big R-404(b) sample for this analysis. 23 We re-estimate Models (1b) and (1d) after replacing ICMW_SOX404b with ICMW_NUM (average number of ICMWs disclosed in the auditor’s internal control report during the misstatement period). As reported in Table 6, Panel A, the coefficient on ICMW_NUM is negative and highly significant ( p < 0.01) in both models, consistent with our prediction. Our next proxy for ICMW severity is the existence of entity-level ICMWs. 24 ICMWs can be classified as entity-level (i.e., company-level) and process-level (i.e., account-level or transaction level). Entity-level ICMWs perva-sively influence a company’s financial reporting and are not easy to circumvent during the audit. In addition, they are usually accompanied by process-level ICMWs. Therefore, entity-level ICMWs are regarded as more severe (Hermanson & Ye, 2009; Hsu & Liao, 2012; Ye et al., 2013). We define ICMW_ENTITY as the average fre-quency of the disclosure of at least one entity-level ICMW during the misstatement period. ICMW_PROCESS is measured as the average frequency of the disclosure of at least one process-level ICMW, without any entity-level ICMWs, during the misstatement period. Our analysis is based on the 404(b) sample and the big R-404(b) sample since the data for entity-level ICMWs are available in only Section 404 reports. We re-estimate Model (1b) and Model (1d) after replacing ICMW_SOX404b with ICMW_ENTITY and ICMW_PROCESS . As presented in Table 6, Panel B, both the coefficients on ICMW_ENTITY and ICMW_PROCESS are significantly negative ( p < 0.01 and p < 0.05, respectively) in Model (1b), while only the coefficient on ICMW_ENTITY is significant in Model (1d). 25 Hence, we find evidence that the negative association between ICMW disclosure frequency and misstate-ment duration applies to companies that disclose entity-level ICMWs and those that disclose only process-level ICMWs. 4.5.2 The severity of misstatements We next examine whether the association between ICMW disclosure frequency and misstatement duration depends on whether the misstatements related to restatements are intentional because intentional misstatements are considered more severe than unintentional misstatements. Following Hennes et al. (2008) and Armstrong et al. (2013), we regard intentional misstatements as those related to fraud or those that involve SEC investigations (i.e., FRAUD = 1 or SEC = 1). We define INTENTIONAL as 1 if the misstatement related to a restatement is intentional and 0 otherwise. Then, we re-conduct the regressions after adding INTENTIONAL and the interaction term ICMW_OVERALL × INTENTIONAL (ICMW_SOX404b × INTENTIONAL ) to Models (1a) and (1c) (Models (1b) and (1d)). Panel C of Table 6 reports the results. ICMW_OVERALL × INTENTIONAL and ICMW_SOX404b × INTEN-TIONAL are significantly negative in Models (1a) and (1b), respectively, but not in Models (1c) and (1d), respec-tively. Therefore, the negative association between ICMW disclosure frequency and misstatement duration is stronger for intentional restatements, but this association does not hold for the reissuance (material) restatement samples. 23 Results are similar if we use a sample of misstatements for which Section 404(a) reports are available. 24 Following Donelson et al. (2017), we code an ICMW as entity-level if it involves at least one of the following issues according to Audit Analytics: (1) non-routine transaction control issues (Code 77); (2) journal entry control issues (Code 76); (3) foreign, related, affiliated or subsidiary issues (Code 38); (4) an ineffective, non-existent, or understaffed audit committee (Code 11); (5) senior management competency, tone, or reliability issues (Code 13); (6) an insuf-ficient or non-existent internal audit function (Code 18); (7) ethical or compliance issues with personnel (Code 21); and (8) accounting personnel resources, competency or training issues (Code 44). Audit Analytics’ codes are in parentheses. 25 In both regressions, the coefficient of ICMW_ENTITY is not significantly different from that of ICMW_PROCESS .14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 142 MAO AND YE 

> TA B L E 6  Additional analyses
> Panel A: Survival analysis–severity of ICMWs (number of ICMWs) 404(b) sample  Big R-404(b) sample Model (1b)  Model (1d) Variable  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value
> Intercept  0.229  0.444  0.207  0.428
> ICMW_NUM  -0.076  ***  0.001  -0.098  ***  0.004
> LN_AUDTENURE  0.051  **  0.043  0.109  **  0.027
> LN_NAF  0.002  0.731  -0.004  0.623
> LNASSET  0.026  **  0.039  0.055  **  0.027
> LEV  0.058  0.303  0.011  0.916
> BTM  -0.032  0.171  -0.091  0.108
> LOSS  -0.050  0.223  -0.061  0.382
> ROA  0.018  0.850  -0.135  0.318
> RESTRUCTURE  0.015  0.700  0.006  0.928
> LN_FIRMAGE  0.014  0.591  0.010  0.846
> GEOSEGNUM  -0.001  0.902  -0.008  0.575
> BUSSEGNUM  -0.003  0.798  -0.013  0.520
> BIG4  -0.151  ***  0.002  -0.081  0.318
> TACC  -0.177  0.257  -0.149  0.514
> INST_PERC  -0.075  0.119  -0.145  0.134
> INST_HHI  0.229  **  0.019  0.121  0.527
> NUM_ISSUES_MIS  0.023  * 0.083  0.047  **  0.036
> REV_RES  0.145  ***  0.001  0.072  0.310
> RES_NEGEFFECT  -0.20  0.597  0.055  0.403
> RS_402  -0.058  0.154 (Continues) 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

MAO AND YE 143 

> TA B L E 6  (Continued)
> Panel A: Survival analysis–severity of ICMWs (number of ICMWs) 404(b) sample  Big R-404(b) sample Model (1b)  Model (1d) Variable  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value
> FRAUD  0.257  **  0.013  0.008  0.958
> SEC  0.157  **  0.013  0.173  **  0.017 Year indicators  Yes  Yes Industry indicators  Yes  Yes
> N 1095  310 Log-likelihood  -732  -178
> Panel B: Survival analysis–severity of ICMWs (entity-level vs. process-level ICMWs) 404(b) sample  Big R-404(b) sample Model (1b)  Model (1d) Variable  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value
> Intercept  0.245  0.413  0.212  0.418
> ICMW_ENTITY  -0.219  ***  0.002  -0.233  **  0.019
> ICMW_PROCESS  -0.233  **  0.037  -0.214  0.142
> LN_AUDTENURE  0.049  * 0.050  0.105  **  0.034
> LN_NAF  0.002  0.705  -0.004  0.623
> LNASSET  0.025  **  0.044  0.054  **  0.029
> LEV  0.038  0.481  0.000  0.998
> BTM  -0.035  0.139  -0.086  0.128
> LOSS  -0.230  * 0.095  -0.059  0.399 (Continues) 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

144 MAO AND YE 

> TA B L E 6  (Continued)
> Panel B: Survival analysis–severity of ICMWs (entity-level vs. process-level ICMWs) 404(b) sample  Big R-404(b) sample Model (1b)  Model (1d) Variable  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value
> ROA  -0.001  0.935  -0.129  0.342
> RESTRUCTURE  -0.004  0.724  -0.004  0.957
> LN_FIRMAGE  0.018  0.630  0.020  0.680
> GEOSEGNUM  -0.043  0.300  -0.008  0.550
> BUSSEGNUM  0.056  0.567  -0.012  0.542
> BIG4  -0.148  ***  0.002  -0.078  0.339
> TACC  0.016  0.544  -0.182  0.426
> INST_PERC  -0.078  0.106  -0.134  0.167
> INST_HHI  0.245  **  0.013  0.122  0.526
> NUM_ISSUES_MIS  0.023  * 0.085  0.044  * 0.052
> REV_RES  0.141  ***  0.001  0.069  0.336
> RES_NEGEFFECT  -0.026  0.507  0.055  0.409
> RS_402  -0.051  0.206
> FRAUD  0.252  **  0.015  0.003  0.986
> SEC  0.162  **  0.010  0.169  **  0.020 Year indicators  Yes  Yes Industry indicators  Yes  Yes
> N 1095  310 Log-likelihood  -730  -179 (Continues) 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

MAO AND YE 145 

> TA B L E 6  (Continued)
> Panel C: Survival analysis–severity of misstatements (intentional misstatements vs. unintentional misstatements) All restatements  Big R restatements Model (1a)  Model (1b)  Model (1c)  Model (1d) Variable  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value
> Intercept  -0.068  0.671  0.222  0.456  -0.208  0.383  0.186  0.477
> ICMW_OVERALL  -0.087  ***  0.007  -0.097  * 0.082
> ICMW_SOX404b  -0.197  ***  0.002  -0.195  **  0.029
> INTENTIONAL  0.146  ***  0.001  0.221  ***  0.000  0.120  **  0.020  0.175  **  0.015
> ICMW_OVERALL  ×INTENTIONAL  -0.205  **  0.034  -0.167  0.194
> ICMW_SOX404b  × INTENTIONAL  -0.401  * 0.063  -0.443  0.189
> LN_AUDTENURE  0.021  0.204  0.045  * 0.074  0.081  ***  0.009  0.100  **  0.043
> LN_NAF  0.001  0.830  0.002  0.689  0.002  0.718  -0.003  0.729
> LNASSET  0.037  ***  < 0.0001  0.025  **  0.039  0.048  ***  0.000  0.052  **  0.035
> LEV  0.014  0.416  0.056  0.318  0.005  0.877  0.012  0.906
> BTM  -0.011  0.306  -0.031  0.182  -0.014  0.463  -0.091  0.110
> LOSS  -0.036  0.169  -0.046  0.260  -0.059  0.168  -0.054  0.440
> ROA  -0.005  0.527  0.028  0.771  -0.016  0.254  -0.134  0.323
> RESTRUCTURE  -0.017  0.475  0.017  0.652  -0.034  0.421  0.017  0.807
> LN_FIRMAGE  0.014  0.400  0.015  0.564  0.013  0.655  0.024  0.624
> GEOSEGNUM  0.002  0.692  -0.001  0.937  0.007  0.518  -0.009  0.532
> BUSSEGNUM  -0.005  0.494  -0.003  0.750  -0.018  0.227  -0.012  0.540
> BIG4  -0.030  0.333  -0.139  ***  0.004  -0.042  0.419  -0.073  0.364 (Continues) 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

146 MAO AND YE 

> TA B L E 6  (Continued)
> Panel C: Survival analysis–severity of misstatements (intentional misstatements vs. unintentional misstatements) All restatements  Big R restatements Model (1a)  Model (1b)  Model (1c)  Model (1d) Variable  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value  Coefficient  p-value
> TACC  0.022  0.449  -0.180  0.247  0.012  0.789  -0.151  0.507
> INST_PERC  0.062  * 0.099  -0.079  0.105  0.025  0.725  -0.132  0.172
> INST_HHI  0.010  0.814  0.258  ***  0.009  -0.068  0.334  0.129  0.501
> NUM_ISSUES_MIS  0.012  0.182  0.025  * 0.061  0.001  0.932  0.045  **  0.042
> REV_RES  0.116  ***  0.000  0.143  ***  0.001  0.061  0.207  0.070  0.319
> RES_NEGEFFECT  -0.001  0.980  -0.022  0.573  0.067  0.142  0.055  0.407
> RS_402  0.016  0.509  -0.060  0.140 Year indicators  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes Industry indicators  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
> N 1939  1095  637  310 Log-likelihood  -1175  -731  -370  -178
> Note : Panel A reports the regressions based on two accelerated failure time parametric duration models with the 404(b) sample and the big R-404(b) sample. The dependent variable
> FYEAR_MIS  is natural-logarithm-transformed in the model specifications of the survival analysis. The test variable is  ICMW_NUM . Panel B reports the regressions based on two accelerated failure time parametric duration models with the 404(b) sample and the big R-404(b) sample. The dependent variable  FYEAR_MIS  is natural-logarithm-transformed in the model specifica-tions of the survival analysis. The test variables are  ICMW_ENTITY  and  ICMW_PROCESS . Panel C reports the regressions based on four accelerated failure time parametric duration models after  INTENTIONAL and ICMW_OVERALL  × INTENTIONAL  (ICMW_SOX404b  × INTENTIONAL ) are added to Models (1a) and (1c) (Models (1b) and (1d)). The dependent variable  FYEAR_MIS  is natural-logarithm transformed in the model specifications of the survival analysis. Please see the Appendix for variable definitions and Table 1, Panel A for sample details. ***  , **  and  * indicate significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10 levels, respectively, two-tailed. 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

MAO AND YE 147 

## 5 CONCLUSION 

Only a small proportion of companies that announce restatements disclose existing ICMWs during misstatement peri-ods (Rice & Weber, 2012). Prior research finds that the disclosure of ICMWs during misstatement periods leads to negative consequences, including class-action lawsuits, management turnover, and auditor resignations (Rice et al., 2015). We extend this emerging line of research and investigate whether the disclosure of ICMWs during misstate-ment periods has one specific benefit—shortening the duration of misstatements. We find consistent evidence that misstatement duration decreases with ICMW disclosure during misstatement periods. Our results are robust to dif-ferent samples and different measures of the dependent and test variables. In addition, we find that the number of ICMWs disclosed is negatively related to misstatement duration. Both the disclosure of entity-level and process-level ICMWs shorten misstatement duration. Also, the negative association between ICMW disclosure and misstatement duration is more salient when the misstatements related to the restatements are more severe. The underreporting of ICMWs suggests that the enforcement surrounding SOX Section 404 does not provide strong incentives for companies to report ICMWs (Rice et al., 2015). Our results may help companies understand the benefits of the timely disclosure of ICMWs and motivate them to act in the best interests of their investors. Our results also have policy implications, as regulators, such as the PCAOB, have attempted to encourage timely reporting of ICMWs. We advocate more studies on the consequences of timely disclosures of existing ICMWs. We also encour-age researchers and practitioners to explore other mechanisms, including shareholder activism and other corporate governance measures, that may motivate companies to detect and report ICMWs on time. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We are very grateful to Editor Ted Christensen and the anonymous reviewer for their great help. We thank Christiana Antwi-Obimpeh, Victoria Baldwin, Emery Pechacek, and Susan Scholz for their very helpful comments and SeekEdgar LLC for providing data. We appreciate the Institute for Fraud Prevention for supporting an earlier version of this paper. 

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Data are available from public sources as identified in the text. 

REFERENCES 

Armstrong, C., Larcker, D., Ormazabal, G., & Taylor, D. (2013). The relation between equity incentives and misreporting: The role of risk-taking incentives. Journal of Financial Economics , 109 (2), 327–350. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2013.02. 019 Coleman, D. (2017). The impact of SOX on financial restatements . https://blog.auditanalytics.com/the-impact-of-sox-on-financial-restatements Dechow, P., Ge, W., Larson, R. C., & Sloan, R. (2011). Predicting material accounting misstatements. Contemporary Accounting Research , 28 (1), 17–82. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1911-3846.2010.01041.x Donelson, D., Ege, M. S., & Mcinnis, J. M. (2017). Internal control weaknesses and financial reporting fraud. Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory , 36 (3), 45–69. https://doi.org/10.2308/ajpt-51608 Fan, Y., Li, C., & Raghunandan, K. (2017). Is SOX 404(a) management internal control reporting an effective alternative to SOX 404(b) internal control audits? Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory , 36 (3), 71–89. https://doi.org/10.2308/ajpt-51669 Feng, M., & Li, C. (2010 ). Does SOX Section 404 curb material misstatements? (Working paper), The University of Pittsburgh. https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi =10.1.1.720.3994&rep =rep1&type =pdf Goh, B. W. (2009). Audit committees, boards of directors, and remediation of material weaknesses in internal control. Contem-porary Accounting Research , 26 (2), 549–579. https://doi.org/10.1506/car.26.2.9 Goh, B. W., & Li, D. (2013). The disciplining effect of the internal control provisions of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act on the gover-nance structures of firms. International Journal of Accounting , 48 (2), 248–278. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intacc.2013.04.004 Hammersley, J. S., Myers, L. A., & Zhou, J. (2012). The failure to remediate previously disclosed material weaknesses in internal controls. Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory , 31 (2), 73–111. https://doi.org/10.2308/ajpt-10268 Hennes, K., Leone, A., & Miller, B. (2008). The importance of distinguishing errors from irregularities in restatement research: The case of restatements and CEO/CFO turnover. The Accounting Review , 83 (6), 1487–1519. https://doi.org/10.2308/accr. 2008.83.6.1487 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 148 MAO AND YE 

He, L., Sarath, B., & Wans, N. (2019). Material weakness disclosures and restatement announcements: The joint and order effects. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting , 46 (1/2), 68–104. https://doi.org/10.1111/jbfa.12363 Hermanson, D. R., & Ye, Z. (2009). Why do some accelerated filers with SOX Section 404 material weaknesses provide early warning under Section 302? Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory , 28 (2), 247–271. https://doi.org/10.2308/aud.2009.28. 2.247 Hirschey, M., Smith, K. R., & Wilson, W. M. (2015). The timeliness of restatement disclosures and financial reporting credibility. 

Journal of Business Finance & Accounting , 42 (7-8), 826–859. https://doi.org/10.1111/jbfa.12125 Hoag, M. L., & Hollingsworth, C. W. (2011). An intertemporal analysis of audit fees and Section 404 material weaknesses. Audit-ing: A Journal of Practice & Theory , 30 (2), 173–200. https://doi.org/10.2308/ajpt-50005 Hogan, B., & Jonas, G. A. (2016). The association between executive pay structure and the transparency of restatement disclo-sures. Accounting Horizons , 30 (3), 307–323. https://doi.org/10.2308/acch-51454 Hogan, C. E., Lambert, T. A., & Schmidt, J. J. (2013). Do management internal control certifications increase the likelihood of restatement-related litigation ? (Working paper), Michigan State University, Lehigh University, and University of Texas at Austin. https://ssrn.com/abstract=2169553 Hogan, C. E., & Wilkins, M. S. (2008). Evidence on the audit risk model: Do auditors increase audit fees in the presence of internal control deficiencies? Contemporary Accounting Research , 25 (1), 219–242. https://doi.org/10.1506/car.25.1.9 Hoitash, R., Hoitash, U., & Bedard, J. C. (2008). Internal control quality and audit pricing under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Audit-ing: A Journal of Practice & Theory , 27 (1), 105–126. https://doi.org/10.2308/aud.2008.27.1.105 Hoitash, R., Hoitash, U., & Johnstone, K. M. (2012). Internal control material weaknesses and CFO compensation. Contemporary Accounting Research , 29 (3), 768–803. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1911-3846.2011.01122.x Hsu, A., & Liao, C. (2012). Do compensation committees pay attention to Section 404 opinions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act? 

Journal of Business Finance & Accounting , 39 (9-10), 1240–1271. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-5957.2012.02302.x Johnstone, K., Li, C., & Rupley, K. (2011). Changes in corporate governance associated with the revelation of internal con-trol material weaknesses and their subsequent remediation. Contemporary Accounting Research , 28 (1), 331–383. https:// doi.org/10.1111/j.1911-3846.2010.01037.x Khurana, I. K., & Kyung, H. (2021). Internal control material weakness and CEO recruitment. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting , 48 (9-10), 1940–1987. https://doi.org/10.1111/jbfa.12560 Kim, J. B., Song, B. Y., & Zhang, L. (2011). Internal control weakness and bank loan contracting: Evidence from SOX Section 404 disclosures. The Accounting Review , 86 (4), 1157–1188. https://doi.org/10.2308/accr-10036 Lennox, C., & Pittman, J. (2010). Big five audits and accounting fraud. Contemporary Accounting Research , 27 (1), 209–247. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1911-3846.2010.01007.x Li, C., & Wang, Q. (2006). SOX 4O4 assessments and financial reporting errors (Working paper), University of Kansas and Iowa State University. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=926180 Li, C., Sun, L., & Ettredge, M. (2010). Financial executive qualifications, financial executive turnover, and adverse SOX 404 opin-ions. Journal of Accounting and Economics , 50 (1), 93–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacceco.2010.01.003 Liu, X., & Liu, X. (2017). CEO equity incentives and the remediation of material weaknesses in internal control. Journal of Busi-ness Finance & Accounting , 44 (9-10), 1338–1369. https://doi.org/10.1111/jbfa.12265 Nagy, A. L. (2010). Section 404 compliance and financial reporting quality. Accounting Horizons , 24 (3), 441–454. https://doi. org/10.2308/acch.2010.24.3.441 Ogneva, M., Subramanyam, K. R., & Raghunandan, K. (2007). Internal control weakness and cost of equity: Evidence from SOX Section 404 disclosures. The Accounting Review , 82 (5), 1255–1297. https://doi.org/10.2308/accr.2007.82.5.1255 Palmrose, Z. -V., Richardson, V. J., & Scholz, S. (2004). Determinants of market reactions to restatement announcements. Jour-nal of Accounting and Economics , 37 , 59–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacceco.2003.06.003 Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB). (2004). Auditing Standard No. 2: An audit of internal control over financial reporting performed in conjunction with an audit of financial statements. (AS No. 2. Washington, D.C.: PCAOB) . https://pcaobus. org/Standards/Archived/Pages/Auditing_Standard_2.aspx Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB). (2007). Auditing Standard No. 5: An audit of internal control over financial reporting performed that is integrated with an audit of financial statements . (AS No. 5. Washington, DC: PCAOB). https://pcaobus.org/Standards/Archived/PreReorgStandards/Pages/Auditing_Standard_5.aspx Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB). (2015). Concept release on audit quality indicators (Washing-ton, DC: PCAOB). https://pcaob-assets.azureedge.net/pcaob-dev/docs/default-source/rulemaking/docket_041/release_ 2015_005.pdf Rice, S. C., & Weber, D. P. (2012). How effective is internal control reporting under SOX 404? Determinants of the (non)disclosure of existing material weaknesses. Journal of Accounting Research , 50 (3), 811–843. https://doi.org/10.1111/j. 1475-679X.2011.00434.x Rice, S. C., Weber, D. P., & Wu, B. (2015). Does SOX 404 have teeth? Consequences of the failure to report existing internal control weaknesses. The Accounting Review , 90 (3), 1169–1200. https://doi.org/10.2308/accr-50974 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License MAO AND YE 149 

Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). (2002). Certification of disclosure in companies’ quarterly and annual reports. Release Nos. 33–8124, 34–46427, File No. S7-21-02. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office . https://www.sec.gov/rules/final/ 33-8124.htm Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). (2004a). Final rule: Additional Form 8-K disclosure requirements and acceleration of filing date. Release Nos. 33–8400, 34–49424, File No. S7-22-02. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office . https://www.sec. gov/rules/final/33-8400.htm Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). (2004b). Final Rule: Management’s report on internal control over financial reporting and certification of disclosure in exchange act periodic reports. Release Nos. 33–8392; 34–49313; File Nos. S7-40-02; S7-06-03. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office . https://www.sec.gov/rules/final/33-8392.htm Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). (2006). Internal control over financial reporting in exchange act periodic reports of non-accelerated filers and newly public companies. Release Nos. 33–8760; 34–54942; File No. S7-06-03 . https://www.sec.gov/rules/ final/2006/33-8760.pdf Seidel, T. A. (2017). Auditors’ response to assessments of high control risk: Further insights. Contemporary Accounting Research ,

34 (3), 1340–1377. https://doi.org/10.1111/1911-3846.12312 Singer, Z., & Zhang, J. (2018). Auditor tenure and the timeliness of misstatement discovery. Accounting Review , 93 (2), 315–338. https://doi.org/10.2308/accr-51871 Srinivasan, S., Wahid, A., & Yu, G. (2015). Admitting mistakes: Home country effect on the reliability of restatement reporting. 

The Accounting Review , 90 (3), 1201–1240. https://doi.org/10.2308/accr-50887 U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Financial Services. (2002). Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. Public Law No. 107– 204. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office . https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/PLAW-107publ204/pdf/PLAW-107publ204.pdf Velury, U., & Jenkins, D. (2006). Institutional ownership and the quality of earnings. Journal of Business Research , 59 (9), 1043– 1051. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2006.05.001 Wooldridge, J. M. (2009). Introductory econometrics: A modern approach (5th ed.). Michigan State University. Ye, Z., Hermanson, D. R., & Krishnan, J. (2013). Shareholder voting in director elections and initial SOX Section 404 Reports. 

Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance , 28 (2), 103–127. https://doi.org/10.1177/0148558x13477305 

How to cite this article: Mao, J., & Ye, Z. (2023). Internal control material weakness disclosure and misstatement duration. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting , 50, 118–151. https://doi.org/10.1111/jbfa.12613 

APPENDIX Variable definitions Dependent variable Definition 

FYEAR_MIS The number of consecutive annual financial statements misstated Independent variables Expected sign Definition Test variables 

ICMW_OVERALL ? The average frequency of the ICMW disclosure under SOX Section 302, 404(a), or 404(b) during the misstatement period. First, for each misstatement year, ICMWALL is coded as 1 if one or more ICMWs are reported under SOX Section 302, 404(a), or 404(b) in fiscal year t and 0 otherwise. Then, 

ICMW_OVERALL is the average of ICMWALL across all misstatement years 

ICMW_SOX404b ? The average frequency of ICMW disclosure under SOX 404(b) during the misstatement period. First, for each misstatement year, ICMW404b is coded as 1 if one or more ICMWs are reported under SOX 404(b) in fiscal year t and 0 otherwise. Then, 

ICMW_SOX404b is the average of ICMW404b across all misstatement years (Continues) 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 150 MAO AND YE 

Dependent variable Definition 

ICMW_NUM ? The average number of ICMWs disclosed in the auditor’s internal control report during the misstatement period 

ICMW_ENTITY ? The average frequency of the disclosure of at least one entity-level ICMW in the auditor’s internal control report during the misstatement period 

ICMW_PROCESS ? The average frequency of the disclosure of at least one process-level ICMW, without any entity-level ICMW(s), in the auditor’s internal control report during the misstatement period 

Control variables Control variables measured as the average during the misstatement period :

LN_AUDTENURE + Natural logarithm of auditor tenure by the end of fiscal year tLN_NAF ? Natural logarithm of non-audit fees paid to the external auditor in fiscal year tLNASSET + Natural logarithm of total assets (in millions) at the end of fiscal year tLEV + Total liabilities divided by total assets, both at the end of fiscal year tBTM – Book-to-market ratio at the end of fiscal year tLOSS – 1 if a company reports a loss in fiscal year t and 0 otherwise 

ROA + The ratio of net income to average total assets, both in fiscal year tRESTRUCTURE – 1 if the absolute value of reported special items in fiscal year t is larger than 1% of average total assets in fiscal year tLN_FIRMAGE – Natural logarithm of the number of years a company has been included in Compustat by the end of fiscal year tGEOSEGNUM + Number of geographic segments at the end of fiscal year tBUSSEGNUM + Number of business segments at the end of fiscal year tBIG4 – 1 if the auditor in fiscal year t is a Big 4 auditor and 0 otherwise 

TACC – Total accruals at the end of fiscal year t scaled by the average total assets in fiscal year tINST_PERC ? The proportion of shares held by institutional investors around the end of fiscal year tINST_HHI ? The concentration of institutional ownership around the end of fiscal year t, calculated based on the Herfindahl–Hirschman index (Continues) 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License MAO AND YE 151 

Dependent variable Definition Control variables for the severity of misstatements 

NUM_ISSUES_MIS ? The number of issues reported in the restatement, as coded by Audit Analytics. These issues belong to the following three categories: accounting rule (GAAP/FASB) application failures; financial fraud, irregularities and misrepresentations and other significant issues (the category of “errors—accounting and clerical applications” is deleted in our sample selection process) 

REV_RES ? 1 if a restatement is related to revenue recognition issues and 0 otherwise 

RES_NEGEFFECT ? 1 if a restatement has an income-decreasing effect and 0 otherwise 

RS_402 ? 1 if a restatement is disclosed in Item 4.02 of an 8-K filing (reissuance restatement) and 0 otherwise 

FRAUD ? 1 if a restatement is related to fraud and 0 otherwise 

SEC ? 1 if the SEC is involved in the restatement process and 0 otherwise 

INTENTIONAL ? 1 if the misstatement related to a restatement is intentional (i.e., FRAUD = 1 or SEC = 1) and 0 otherwise 14685957, 2023, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12613 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

