Title: Material weakness disclosures and restatement announcements: The joint and order effects

URL Source: blob://pdf/41898d9d-cff0-4517-9b00-44857b4cf551

Markdown Content:
DOI: 10.1111/jbfa.12363 

# Material weakness disclosures and restatement announcements: The joint and order effects Li He 1 Bharat Sarath 2 Nader Wans 3 

> 1

Southwestern University of Finance and Eco-nomics, 555 Liutai Avenue, Chengdu, P.R. China 611130 2 Rutgers Business School, 1 Washington Park, Newark, NJ 07102, USA 3 Faculty of Business Administration, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John 's, NL A1B 3X5, Canada 

Correspondence 

Bharat Sarath, Rutgers Business School, 1 Wash-ington Park, Newark, NJ 07102, USA. Email: bsarath@andromeda.rutgers.edu 

JEL Classification: M40, G14, K22 

## Abstract 

We examine differences in stock price, option volatility, and litiga-tion reactions to restatement announcements that are associated with a material weakness (MW) disclosure. Contrasted with restate-ments that are not associated with any MW disclosure, our analy-ses reveal that firms that announce both a restatement and an asso-ciated MW experience significantly more negative market returns, greater implied volatility, and higher likelihood of class action law-suits. Separating the restatements into timely reporters , where the MW precedes the restatement, and non-timely reporters , where the MW is concurrent with or follows the restatement, we find that timely reporters experience more negative returns at the time of the restatement, relative to non-timely reporters, suggesting that investors perceive the early MW disclosure to signal more perva-sive control-related problems. Interestingly, we find that timely and non-timely reporters are equally likely to be sued, consistent with the argument that wrongdoing (through either a timely or non-timely MW disclosure) provides stronger grounds for establishing scien-ter. However, timely reporters appear to secure more favorable lit-igation outcomes: they face higher likelihood of lawsuit dismissals and pay much lower settlements, compared to non-timely reporters. Overall, our evidence provides new insights into how market par-ticipants incorporate information about internal control weaknesses into their perceptions regarding the economic implications of finan-cial restatements, and financial reporting quality. 

K E Y W O R D S 

class actions, financial reporting quality, market reaction, material weakness disclosure, restatements 

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

Sections 302 and 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (hereafter, SOX 302; SOX 404) include key provisions that require both managers and auditors to periodically evaluate the quality of internal controls over financial reporting (ICFR) and to report any material weakness (MW) that is detected. Therefore, MW disclosures provide early warning to investors 

68 c© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jbfa J Bus Fin Acc. 2019;46:68–104. HE ET AL . 69 

that internal controls are not designed or operating in a manner to prevent or detect material misstatements aris-ing in the financial statements (PCAOB, 2004). Prior research has examined the capital market consequences of MW disclosures and restatement announcements in isolation , finding consistently that these disclosures lead to a nega-tive stock price reaction (Hammersley, Myers, & Shakespeare, 2008; Palmrose, Richardson, & Scholz, 2004). We con-tribute to extant research by examining how markets react to restatement announcements that are associated with an MW disclosure made contemporaneously with, before, or after the restatement. We argue that a restatement with an associated MW disclosure would provide informational value to guide investors to assess the implications of financial restatements, as compared with a restatement that is not connected to any MW disclosure. Examining the consequences of restatements and associated MW disclosures in combination is important for sev-eral reasons. First, very generally, information about an underlying economic event could elicit different responses based on whether it is conveyed in a single disclosure or multiple disclosures (Gonedes, 1978). 1 More specifically, 

timely reporting of MWs (i.e., before restatements occur) is important in assessing the quality of financial reporting. For example, Moody 's expresses concerns that late reporting of MWs (i.e., concurrent with, or subsequent to the restate-ment) could be lagging indicators of reporting quality problems, arguing that late MW reporting undermines the use-fulness of these reports (Jonas, Rosenberg, & Gale, 2006). Further, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB), in its recent concept release on developing a portfolio of quantitative audit quality indicators, lists “the num-ber of restatements for errors resulting from fraud or other financial reporting misconduct with no previously reported material weakness in internal control ” as a negative indicator of audit quality (PCAOB, 2015, p. A-21), suggesting that the PCAOB views timely MW reporting as a signal of higher audit quality. Finally, a large number of restatements in the post-SOX era have been made to correct immaterial misstatements (Burks, 2011), leading to concerns that they “may reduce confidence in reporting, and may create confusion that reduces the efficiency of investor analysis” (ACIFR, 2008, p. 78). Assessing restatements in light of the effectiveness of the underlying ICFR can shed light on restatements that are associated with greater adverse effects. Our study contributes to prior research by analyzing differences in stock price, option volatility, and litigation reactions to restatement announcements that are associated with MW dis-closures contrasted with restatements that are not associated with any MW disclosure, and whether the reaction to MW-associated restatements vary with the timeliness of the MW disclosure. Auditing Standard No. 5 characterizes MWs as deficiencies “such that there is a reasonable possibility that a mate-rial misstatement of the company 's interim or annual financial statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis.” This argument is consistent with both prior studies that firms with ineffective control procedures are more likely to have material misstatements (e.g., Nagy, 2010), and the PCAOB argument that restatements imply that MWs are likely to exist (PCAOB, 2007). 2 Hence, ideally, restatements should be preceded by a related MW disclosure (Glass Lewis & Co., 2007). However, some firms only make these disclosures after they are compelled to restate their finan-cials; still others do not make these disclosures at all (Besch, 2009; IMA, 2008; Rice & Weber, 2012). 3,4 The variation in the timeliness of MW reporting in relation to restatements leads restating firms to fall into one of three groups: (i) firms 1 Kaznik and Lev (1995) examine the effect of a voluntary disclosure that may precede a negative earnings shock that will be reported in a 10-Q. While an MW is not a voluntary disclosure, the fact that it is expected to precede a restatement leads to some economic similarities between our setting and that of Kaznik and Lev (1995). A recent survey of the many studies concerning the use of single or multiple signals regarding some underlying news may be found in Connelly, Certo, Ireland, and Reutzel (2010). 2 The argument that restatements have typically arisen from weak internal controls has been documented in the literature. Kinney and McDaniel (1989) argue that revision of previously issued financial statements implies a breach in internal control systems. Turner and Weirich (2006, p. 17) argue that “If these companies’ internal controls really had no weaknesses, why did the companies have errors that required restatements?” 3 For example, Glass Lewis & Co. (2007) documents that in 2005, 57% of the MW disclosures were disclosed subsequent to restatement filings and were more of a “formality” than “a warning flag”. 4 There is always the possibility that some restatements do not relate to MWs. First, firms may correct minor errors that do not necessitate classifying the related ICFR weakness as material. For example, out-of-period adjustments are error corrections made through a onetime charge in the current period, and do not require a restatement (Choudhary, Merkley, & Schipper, 2016). Second, the PCAOB allows for “extenuating or unique circumstances” where a misstatement does not necessitate the existence of an MW (PCAOB, 2004, para. E97)—for instance, if it “reflected the SEC 's subsequent view of an accounting matter, when the auditor concluded that management had reasonable support for its original position” (PCAOB, 2004, para. E99). Finally, there are restatements that are technical, where the restatement does not imply that a misstatement existed in the original filing; Audit Analytics excludes both out-of-period adjustments and technical restatements from their restatement database and thus are not included in our sample. 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 70 HE ET AL .

that disclose MWs before restatements ( timely MW reporters); (ii) firms that disclose MWs at the time of, or follow-ing, restatements ( non-timely MW reporters); and (iii) firms that do not disclose an MW either before or after restate-ments ( non-MW reporters). Our aim is to examine (i) how market participants’ reactions to restatements vary across MW reporters and non-MW reporters (i.e., the joint effect: contrasting timely and non-timely reporters against non-MW reporters), and (ii) within the group of MW reporters, whether timeliness has a significant impact (i.e., the order effect: contrasting timely against non-timely reporters). We match restatement and MW disclosures by the underlying accounting issue to ensure that all restatements in our sample are related to , or have arisen from, an MW. Our first set of hypotheses compares investors’ responses to restatements that accompany an MW disclosure (the joint MW/restatements consisting of timely and non-timely reporters) to restatements not associated with an MW disclosure (non-MW reporters). Restatements by non-MW reporters may be perceived as isolated events that do not result from weak internal control system, and thus might not trigger a strong negative reaction. This prediction is consistent with regulators’ concerns over the large number of restatements made by public firms as a result of the increased scrutiny under SOX and which might not necessarily reflect bad news (Burks, 2011). 5 In contrast, a restate-ment that is accompanied by an MW disclosure potentially implies that the underlying deficiencies in the firm 's ICFR may be systemic and, consequently, may lead to stronger negative reactions as the restatement could be one mani-festation of several other problems yet to be uncovered. 6 Our first test thus investigates whether investors perceive the joint MW/restatement disclosure (a restatement preceded by, disclosed concurrently with, or followed by an MW) differently from the single disclosure of a restatement (we call this test the “joint effect” test). Our second set of hypotheses focuses on the timeliness of MW Reporting. Prior research documents that MW dis-closures serve as early warnings that internal controls are not designed or operating in a manner to prevent or detect financial misstatements, and they are thus perceived to have informational value to investors (Hammersley et al., 2008). Restatements also lead to adverse market consequences as investors perceive the revisions of prior financial statements as a sign of poor financial reporting quality (e.g., Palmrose et al., 2004). Understanding how investors incor-porate MW disclosures into their interpretation of subsequent restatements is important since internal control pro-visions were mainly promulgated as a mechanism to communicate to investors the quality of financial reporting on a 

timely basis. 7 To the extent that MW warnings raise a red flag about potential future misstatements, investors would react more negatively to restatements that were not preceded by an MW than to those that were forewarned through an MW disclosure. 8 An alternative theory still posits that an MW that is readily apparent or is more serious will be iden-tified and disclosed promptly, whereas less serious ones may not be detected or delayed. From this perspective, timely disclosures would indicate more pervasive internal control issues, which in turn, signal more adverse future outcomes, compared to non-timely reporters. Additionally, auditors are expected to adjust their audit procedures in response to the elevated control risk when MWs are detected; therefore, a restatement following a timely MW indicates that audi-tors did not modify their substantive tests adequately to reduce detection risk, which can then raise users’ concerns about audit quality. Our second set of predictions examines whether a prior MW disclosure augments or dampens reactions at the time of the restatement relative to delayed MW disclosures (we call this test the “order effect” test). 5 Regulators argue that many restatements in the post-SOX era are made to correct immaterial errors. Further, the Securities and Exchange Commission 's Advi-sory Committee on Improvements to Financial Reporting (ACIFR) emphasized the need to “reduce the number of restatements that do not provide important information to investors,” noting that these restatements may create confusion among investors (ACIFR, 2008, p. 78). 6 Although a current MW disclosure may, by itself, indicate the potential for future problems, we argue that an MW alone does not necessarily imply impair-ment of future financial reporting quality, as firms usually (disclose that they) initiate remediation efforts to fix detected MWs. Therefore, if managers’ remedi-ation efforts are successful, investors should not expect restatements to arise in the future. On the other hand, a subsequent restatement would indicate that the MWs have not been remediated, and therefore indicate that more problems are yet to be uncovered. 7 The internal control provisions of SOX require managers and auditors to report MWs in the periods “in which they exist.” In this regard, the PCAOB argues that “for the implementation of Section 404 of the Act to achieve its objectives, the public must have confidence that all material weaknesses that exist as of the company 's year-end will be publicly reported” (PCAOB, 2004, para. E94). In Moody 's words, “creditors would benefit were management, audit committees and auditors to devote more attention to controls that prevent and detect fraudulent reporting, and to not wait for disasters to occur before flagging these critical control problems” (Jonas et al., 2006, p. 5). 8 Given Moody 's argument that late MW reporting undermines the usefulness of ICFR reporting and the PCAOB view that timely reporting is indicative of higher audit quality compared to non-timely reporting, MW disclosures should convey potentially adverse information ahead of the restatement and provoke a partial reaction in advance of the actual restatement. 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License HE ET AL . 71 

To examine the joint effect, we identify a sample of firms that announce their restatements from January 1, 2003, to December 31, 2013. We further partition the sample into firms that disclose an MW, either prior to, along with, or after the restatement announcement (“joint MW/restatement reporters”), and firms that announce a restatement that is not associated with an MW (“non-MW reporters”). To test the order effect, we partition the joint MW/restatement reporters into firms that made a timely MW disclosure—i.e., “timely MW reporters,” which makes an MW disclosure prior to the restatement—and firms that acknowledged the existence of the MW along with or after the restatement (i.e., “non-timely MW reporters”). We remove restatements in our samples that are not related to, or have not arisen from, an associated MW. The stock market analysis reveals that investors react more negatively to restatements that are accompanied by an MW disclosure than to stand-alone restatements, implying that investors perceive joint MW/restatement disclo-sures as having more adverse effects. We also find that investors react negatively to restatements by both timely and non-timely reporters, although timely reporters experience slightly more negative returns. The evidence of neg-ative returns associated with both firms indicate that investors perceive MW-associated restatements more nega-tively regardless of the timeliness of disclosure; it can also reflect investors’ reaction to poor audit quality: for timely reporters, it suggests that auditors did not adequately modify their substantive tests in response to the MW to reduce detection risk and keep the audit risk relatively low; for non-timely reporters, it suggests that auditors failed to identify the high control risk at the time of the audit. However, because the evidence of poor financial reporting quality is more explicit in the case of timely MW reporters, the reaction to the timely MW group appears to be more negative. In the study of restatements, option market analysis provides insights above that reflected in the stock market. Restatements should increase the underlying uncertainty about the firm 's future prospects. In turn the increased uncertainty should lead to a negative return on its own even if there is no significant future cash flows effect (Gonedes, 1978). If joint disclosures of MWs and restatements indicate more serious accounting breakdowns, we expect the serious breakdowns to lead to greater uncertainty about the firm 's accounting policies and that uncertainty will per-sist in the option market even if the restatement is not particularly adverse. As hypothesized, we find that joint MW/restatement reporters experience greater post-restatement uncertainty manifested as larger increase in implied volatility of options. However, timely and non-timely reporters exhibit similar implied volatility around restatements. Our third set of hypotheses concerns litigation consequences: the likelihood and resolution of class-action law-suits following restatements. Similar to our inferences from the earlier analyses, joint reporters are more likely to be sued compared to non-MW reporters, implying that joint disclosures reflect more serious breakdowns. Further, timely and non-timely reporters are equally likely to be sued, consistent with class-action law that requires proof of scienter (intent to defraud). That is, disclosing a timely MW makes it possible to argue that management knew there were prob-lems but did not remedy them, facilitating misleading reports, whereas a late disclosure may be used to allege that firms willfully hid the news of an MW, allowing the case to proceed to discovery. Interestingly, however, we find that timely reporters have more cases dismissed and pay lower settlement amounts relative to non-timely reporters, suggesting that firms that have been able to uncover at least some of the MWs secure more favorable resolutions, since it might be burdensome for plaintiffs to prove that management has allegedly misled them. Finally, we examine three ancillary possibilities to examine the robustness of our results: (i) long-term stock price effects (ii) effects on future earnings quality, and (iii) effects on analyst forecast revisions. In all these areas, we find broad confirmation of our main inferences that the effects are significantly stronger for joint reporters as compared to non-MW reporters. This study contributes to our understanding of how investors incorporate MW disclosures into their perceptions of financial reporting quality. By examining the interactive effect of MW and restatement disclosures, our study provides evidence that investors rely on ICFR disclosures in assessing the reliability of financial statements (Coates, 2007). Sec-ond, we also contribute to the restatement literature by providing evidence that the reaction to restatements varies with the extent of MW disclosures surrounding restatements. This result is particularly important as recent post-SOX research has generally found that restatements do not trigger as much of a stock price drop as in the pre-SOX era (Scholz, 2008), and that the more timely restatement disclosures in the post-SOX era are associated with more moder-ate decline in financial reporting credibility (Hirschey, Smith, & Wilson, 2015); thus, evaluating restatements in light of 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 72 HE ET AL .

the underlying ICFR will help investors assess accurately the effect of restatements on reporting quality. Third, we also contribute to the litigation literature by providing evidence that restatements alone are insufficient to justify the initia-tion of litigation against public firms. Notably, LaCroix (2014) argues that the internal control provisions have now been the focus of enforcement actions and litigation against public firms. Our evidence triangulates the link between MW, restatements, and litigation by providing evidence that restatements trigger litigation more frequently when accompa-nied by an MW disclosure, regardless of its timing; and that discerning MWs in a timely manner increases the likelihood of litigation dismissal and reduces the settlement amounts paid to plaintiffs. 9

## 2 BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION 

The periodic testing of ICFR required by SOX 302 and 404 seeks to uncover MWs in ICFR and communicate them to investors in a timely manner. This type of information alerts investors to deficiencies in ICFRs, allowing them to determine the degree of reliance they can reasonably place on current and future financial statements. Beneish, Billings, and Hodder (2008) and Hammersley et al. (2008), for example, find that investors respond negatively to SOX 302 MW disclosures because of their expectation that financial statements might be materially misstated. Other streams of research report that internal control weaknesses increase the likelihood of financial misstatements (e.g., Nagy, 2010), and are associated with lower earnings quality (e.g., Ashbaugh-Skaife, Collins, Kinney, & LaFond, 2008; Bédard, 2006; Doyle, Ge, & McVay, 2007; Ghosh & Lee, 2013). Even in non-US regulatory settings, where these types of disclosures are not certified by management or auditors (e.g., Canada), Lu, Richardson, and Salterio (2011) provide evidence suggesting that MW disclosures are still credible signals of accounting quality. Taken together, these studies indicate that investors respond to MW disclosures adversely in anticipation of poor financial reporting quality. Although prior studies generally highlight the value relevance of MW disclosures, research documenting the adverse market effects of restatements fails to consider the impact of the underlying ICFR primarily responsible for producing the financial statements. 10 Our study aims to provide this link by examining the market-based consequences of restatements conditional on the effectiveness of the underlying internal control structure. Accounting rules and regulations explain that restatements are ideally associated with MW disclosures. The PCAOB guidelines suggest that the existence of MWs, as defined under SOX 302 or SOX 404, is a precondition for generating restatements (PCAOB, 2007). That is, “financial restatements to correct material misstatement indicate a higher like-lihood that an MW has existed in the firm 's internal control over financial reporting” (PCAOB, 2007). While MWs and restatements are often causally related, there are also many instances when a company discloses a restatement with-out any prior MW disclosure, and only recognizes the existence of an MW following the restatement announcement, or not at all (e.g., Glass Lewis & Co., 2007). These reporting patterns suggest that firms exhibit variation in MW reporting surrounding restatements. A small number of firms report in a timely fashion: these firms discern control deficiencies before they manifest into financial restatements (timely MW reporters); a larger number of firms certify that their ICFRs are effective until they are required to restate their financials, at which time they disclose that the restatement arises from an MW that they failed to disclose in prior periods (non-timely MW reporters); and a final set of firms report 9 In one related study, Rice, Weber, and Wu (2015) examine the consequences of restatements (auditor turnover, SEC enforcement actions, and class-action lawsuits) conditional on prior MW disclosures. In a working paper, Hogan, Lambert, and Schmidt (2013) examine the effect of combined MW and restatement disclosures on the initiation and resolution of subsequent litigation. Our study differs from these papers in several respects. First, we focus on investors’ reactions in the capital and options markets, an issue that is not investigated by either of the previous studies. Second, our sample comprises initial SOX 302 and SOX 404 disclosures, while the samples used in the previous studies are restricted to SOX 404 disclosures. Focusing on SOX 302 disclosures in examining the information content of restatements is more relevant as prior research finds that SOX 404 disclosures are not associated with earnings quality (Doyle et al., 2007) and elicit lower market returns (Beneish et al., 2008). Third, unlike Rice et al. (2015), who only focus on restatement disclosures that are preceded by an MW, we also examine the joint effect of all linked MW and restatement disclosures. 10 The adverse consequences of restatements include negative stock price reaction (Palmrose et al., 2004), increased litigation and enforcement actions (Files, 2012; Palmrose & Scholz, 2004), executive/director turnover (Srinivasan, 2005), auditor dismissals (Hennes, Leone, & Miller, 2014), higher cost of capital (Hribar & Jenkins, 2004; Park & Wu, 2009), and lower credit ratings (Bierey & Schmidt, 2017). 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License HE ET AL . 73 

that their ICFRs are effective both before and after the restatement (non-MW reporters). We exploit this variation in MW reporting to examine first the consequences of restatements accompanying MW disclosures vis-à-vis stand-alone restatements (“the joint effect”), and then amongst the joint MW/restatement reporters, whether investors’ response to restatements vary with the timeliness of MW disclosure (“order effect”). 

## 3 HYPOTHESES DEVELOPMENT 3.1 The “joint effect” hypotheses 3.1.1 The joint effect and stock price reaction 

This discussion highlights ICFR disclosures as an important channel for communicating the quality of financial report-ing to investors. Ettredge, Li, and Sun (2006) argue that investors rely on ICFR disclosures to assess not only the reli-ability of a company 's financial reports, but also the underlying procedures that produce these reports. As restate-ment announcements are made, investors evaluate this news in conjunction with information about financial reporting quality obtained through internal control reports. ICFR information becomes valuable, particularly as regulators have expressed concern that the number of restatements after SOX has increased significantly, a fact that might have led investors to ignore or underreact to some of these restatements (Burks, 2011). Additionally, given investors’ beliefs that restatements should typically be accompanied with an MW disclosure (as per the PCAOB guidelines), a stand-alone restatement might be perceived as a reflection of transitory issues in reporting quality, and thus it may have less of a negative consequence. In contrast, a joint MW/restatement disclosure would signal that the underlying defi-ciencies in the firms are more pervasive and, as a result, would elicit stronger negative reactions. Under this scenario, investors would predict that the resulting restatement is one manifestation of several other adverse consequences that could potentially also arise from the weak ICFR. Alternatively, the prominent high-profile restatements in the pre-SOX era can also lead investors to react to restate-ments, independent of the effectiveness of the underlying ICFR structure, in which case MW disclosures might not influence investors’ reaction. Based on this logic, we posit our first hypothesis (in null form) as follows: 

H1A: The stock price reaction to a restatement announcement that is associated with an MW disclosure (either before, concurrent with, or after the disclosure) is the same as the stock price reaction to a restatement that is not linked to an MW. 

3.1.2 The joint effect and options price reaction 

Complementing the stock market analysis, we also examine whether joint MW/restatement disclosures affect investors’ uncertainty about firm value, which we capture using the change in the option implied volatility. We expect uncertainty to increase since restatements raise investors’ concerns about financial reporting quality and cause them to devalue reported financial information regarding the firm. Rogers, Skinner, and Buskirk (2009) indicate that report-ing unexpected earnings news may increase uncertainty as investors might wonder whether more surprises were in store. In our context, restatements that are associated with MW disclosures might indicate more pervasive problems in the underlying ICFR and could therefore lead to increased volatility as investors anticipate the detection of more mis-statements. However, we do not expect stand-alone restatements—while also increasing investors’ uncertainty due to the surprise they convey—to have such a pronounced effect, since the accompanying disclosure that ICFR is effective would likely mitigate investors’ concerns that the misstatement effect could be permanent. In addition, restatement disclosures might cause a perception of greater information asymmetry among investors because some investors may hold valuable private information regarding the restatement, and this asymmetry could be exaggerated if the restate-ments are associated with MWs. For these reasons, we test the option market reaction to restatements and posit our hypothesis (in null form) as follows: 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 74 HE ET AL .

H2A: The option market reaction to a restatement announcement that is associated with an MW disclosure (either before, concurrent with, or after the disclosure) is the same as the option market reaction to a restatement that is not linked to an MW. 

## 3.2 The “order effect” hypotheses 3.2.1 The order effect and stock/options price reaction 

Our second set of hypotheses compares the consequences of restatement announcements conditional on prior ICFR disclosures. SOX 302 and SOX 404 were promulgated to require public companies to provide MW disclosures to mar-ket participants in a timely manner, allowing them to determine the degree of reliability and usefulness of financial statements. For the objectives of these provisions to be met, investors “must have confidence that all material weak-nesses that exist as of the company 's year-end will be publicly reported” (PCAOB, 2004, para. E94). The PCAOB also identifies “timely reporting of MWs” as an important indicator of audit quality (PCAOB, 2015). MWs identify existing ICFR deficiencies, which are associated with future misstatements and have been found to have value-relevance to investors and other market participants. When firms announce a restatement, we expect investors’ reaction to be con-tingent on their current expectations of the firm 's ICFR quality, which in turn are based on whether earlier MWs were reported. On one hand, if the initial MW disclosure communicates incremental information suggesting the possibility of future misstatements, restatements emerging from these deficiencies should not surprise investors. Accordingly, we expect less of a negative reaction to restatements that are preceded by earlier MW disclosures. Alternatively, a timely MW disclosure might indicate that the ICFR deficiencies are readily apparent or are more serious, warranting the prompt disclosure, whereas less serious MWs may not be detected on time. From this perspective, a timely disclosure simply indicates more serious problems for the firm than a late disclosure. Additionally, when control risk is high (given the detected MW), auditors should modify the nature, timing, and extent of substantive test procedures to detect material misstatements (e.g., PCAOB, 2007; 2010). Ideally, expanded substantive tests should thus prevent misstatements from occurring. If restatements subsequently occur, investors could penalize the firm for failure to detect and correct all 

existing misstatements arising from the disclosed MW. This line of reasoning is consistent with ACIFR 's position that “financial reporting would clearly be improved if there was more timely identification of MWs, and remediation of these weaknesses to prevent errors from occurring in the first place” (ACIFR, 2008, p. 77). Finally, a Bayesian learning model can also lead to a consistent inference suggesting a further stock price drop when restatements follow an MW disclosure. Investors’ prior perceptions are that firms have no significant error in their financial statements. The disclosure of an MW increases the probability that financial statements are materially mis-stated. If there is a second confirmatory signal (an actual restatement), investors devalue further the information in the financial statements and become skeptical about not only past information but also projections concerning the future. In other words, a setting where investors are never sure about the quality of financial statements and revise their beliefs gradually over time leads to a general prediction that multiple adverse signals (i.e., an MW and restate-ment), in comparison to a single adverse signal, should lead to a significantly greater price drop and increased investor uncertainty. In summary, if the MW disclosure leads to (fully) updated beliefs about the quality of financial statements, we would expect the market reaction for a warned restatement to be lower than that of an unwarned one. However, if there is (Bayesian) learning, the second confirmatory signal of adverse news, namely an adverse restatement, would lead to a stronger reaction. Following this discussion, we posit our hypothesis in (null form) for both the equity and option markets: 

H1B: The stock price reaction to a restatement announcement that is preceded by an MW disclosure is the same as the stock price reaction to a restatement announcement that went unwarned. 

H2B: The option market reaction to a restatement announcement that is preceded by an MW disclosure is the same as the option market reaction to a restatement announcement that went unwarned. 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License HE ET AL . 75 

## 3.3 Shareholder litigation: Likelihood and resolution of class-action lawsuits 

One of the fundamental issues in the disclosure of adverse news, voluntary or mandated, is the effect it has on the likelihood of a lawsuit. Third parties, including investors and creditors, who suffered losses as result of a restatement can sue the firm and/or its auditors based on Rule 10(b)-5 of the 1934 Exchange Act. These lawsuits allege that defen-dants deliberately made a materially false statement or omitted a material fact in their financial statements. However, whether or not plaintiffs are successful in pursuing litigation under Section 10(b)-5 is conditional on their ability to prove scienter (willful dissemination of misleading information). 11 In other words, although a restatement itself can be evidence of admission of error, the plaintiffs bear the burden to prove that the defendant acted consciously to defraud them. We develop our hypotheses against this background, and use the likelihood of class actions, likelihood of litiga-tion dismissal, and settlement amounts to assess the litigation threats against restating firms. 

3.3.1 The joint effect and shareholder litigation 

The disclosure of an MW preceding or following a restatement may be used to support an allegation that management was willfully ignoring problems. For example, plaintiffs can use MW disclosures as evidence of management 's/auditor 'sadmission of wrongdoing stemming from either (i) their knowledge that there were problems but did nothing to remedy them (timely reporting), subsequently leading to misleading reports, or (ii) their willful act to hide the MW news (non-timely reporting). Accordingly, we expect joint reporters to be more prone to litigation threats, compared to non-MW restating firms, leading to the following hypothesis: 

H3A: Firms that disclose an MW accompanying a restatement announcement (either before, concurrent with, or after the disclosure) are more prone to litigation threats compared to firms without an MW disclosure. 

3.3.2 The order effect and shareholder litigation 

Timely MWs reported by firms and/or auditors are usually accompanied by errors detected in current, unpublished financial statements (Kinney & Shepardson, 2011). The revelation of subsequent restatements indicates that only some of these errors were detected in the period the MW was disclosed, while those undetected may show up in financial restatements. Firms and their auditors who identify MWs and at least some of the corresponding errors in a timely manner can defend themselves against plaintiffs’ claims that they acted negligently to defraud them. Consistent with that evidence, Daniel Hurson—a former SEC enforcement lawyer with more than 35 years of litigation experience— suggests that auditors who have identified areas of MWs that later resulted in a restatement can take the position of defense that they identified the issue to management and satisfied their duties under Generally Accepted Auditing Standards (GAAS) (Hurson, 2006). Hurson (2006, p. 32) further explains “The best defense for the accountant is to show a warning to management of risk areas even if the accountant never found the specific misstatement.” Timely MW reporting therefore indicates that managers/auditors have exercised due diligence in uncovering the MW and some of the accompanying misstatements. Based on this discussion, timely MW reporters can face lower litigation threats compared to non-timely reporters. In addition, the failure to comply with ICFR provisions by not disclosing an existing MW (non-timely reporters) is a violation of law according to SEC Rule 10(b)-5 (17 CFR §240.10(b)-5). Specifically, absence of a timely MW disclosure can be construed as an omission of adverse information that is material to investors. Consequently, the subsequent dis-closure that a restatement has manifested from an undisclosed MW could trigger more litigation consequences com-pared to restatements that are forewarned. This explanation would also indicate that timely MW reporters are less prone to litigation sanctions compared to non-timely reporters. Alternative theories can still suggest that timely reporters could face severe litigation sanctions as well. For exam-ple, a restatement following an MW disclosure can indicate failure of management to adequately remediate the 11 Under Rule 10(b)-5, the complaint must “state with particularity facts giving rise to a strong inference that the defendant acted with the required state of mind.” 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 76 HE ET AL .

previously disclosed MW, which gave rise to the restatement. Additionally, timely MW disclosures can provide grounds to strengthen plaintiffs’ claims that managers have exploited the weak internal controls to willfully manipulate financial statements (Doyle et al., 2007). Given the previous competing explanations, we posit the following hypothesis, leaving the prediction unsigned: 

H3B: Firms that disclose an MW before the restatement and those that disclose an MW concurrent with, or after the restatement are equally prone to litigation threats. 

## 4 RESEARCH DESIGN 4.1 Sample selection 

We initially identify 12,010 restatement announcements from January 2003 to December 2013 using the Audit Ana-lytics database. 12 To ensure that MW disclosures are not preceded by prior restatement announcements—that is, to satisfy the “advanced warning” criterion—we consider only “initial” restatement announcements made after January 2003. The process identifies 7,449 initial restatements made by distinct firms. Using the Compustat-CRSP merged database, we identify 2,771 listed firms with available stock market return data. We also remove 483 observations with missing data on our control variables in the market reaction analysis (Eq. 1). We subsequently match the resulting sample to corresponding internal control reports from SOX 302 and SOX 404 MW disclosures to identify our sample groups, i.e., timely, non-timely, and non-MW reporters. Finally, to ensure that all restatements arise from, or are related to an MW, we restrict our timely and non-timely samples to restatements asso-ciated with MW disclosures. In other words, all restatements in our timely sample are related to the preceding MW, and all restatements in the non-timely sample are followed by a related MW. Relation is construed by having both the MW and restatement related to the same accounting issue (e.g., taxes, revenue recognition, consolidation, etc.). We iden-tify the issues covered by the MW and restatement from Audit Analytics taxonomies associated with internal controls and restatement datasets. This process results in removing 11 (3) observations from the timely (non-timely) sample. We limit our timely (non-timely) samples to firms with MWs within four quarters preceding (after) the restatement. Our final sample groups comprise (i) “timely MW reporters,” which consist of firms that disclose a related MW (either a SOX 302 or 404) in any of the four quarters prior to a restatement ( N = 167); (ii) “non-timely MW reporters,” which consist of firms that disclose an MW concurrent with or in any of the four quarters following the restatement ( N = 669); and (iii) “non-MW reporters,” which include restating firms that do not disclose an MW either before, concurrent with, or after the restatement ( N = 1,438). Timely and non-timely reporters comprise the “joint reporters” ( N = 836). Our predictions in H1A, H2A, and H3A involve comparing the joint MW/restatement reporters to the non-MW reporters, while the H1B, H2B, and H3B predictions contrast the timely with the non-timely reporters. Table 1 summarizes the sample selection procedure, and Figure 1 illustrates the sample subgroups used in the study. 

## 4.2 Model specification 4.2.1 Stock price reaction 

To test the effect of restatement disclosures on stock returns (H1A and H1B), we regress abnormal returns on our test and control variables as follows: 

CAR = ?? + ?? 1JOINTMWREST (TIMELY + NONTIMELY ) + ?? 2MAG + ?? 3FRAUD + ?? 4PERSIST 

+ ?? 5PERVASIVE + ?? 6REVENUE + ?? 7SEC + ?? 8MATERIAL + ?? 9SIZE + ?? 10 CAR (- 120 , -2)+ ?? 11 LEVERAGE + Year + Industry + ?? (1) 12 We end our sample in December 2013 to be able to conduct additional tests that require data in the two years following the restatement date, namely, the class-action lawsuits, likelihood of subsequent restatements, and future earnings quality. 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License HE ET AL . 77 

TA B L E 1 Sample selection 

Stock price reaction Options price reaction Class action lawsuits 

Restatement announcements sample identified from Audit Analytics (Jan. 2003 – Dec. 2013) 12,010 12,010 12,010 Delete subsequent restatement announcements (4,561) (4,561) (4,561) Delete observations for unlisted firms and missing market returns (4,678) (4,678) (4,678) Delete observations for missing control variables (483) (1,544) (768) Delete observations for restatements not related to MW by accounting topic (14) (14) (11) Final restatements sample 2,274 1,213 1,992 Restatement subsamples: Restatements that are preceded by, followed by, or disclosed concurrently with a MW ( Joint MW/restatement reporters )

836 476 734 Restatements that are preceded by a MW ( timely MW reporters ) 167 79 155 Restatements that are disclosed with, or followed by a MW (non-timely MW reporters )669 397 579 Restatements that are not associated with a MW ( non-MW reporters ) 1,438 737 1,258 

Notes : This table shows the sample selection procedure. 

CAR is the size-adjusted, abnormal returns over the three-day [ (CAR( -1, +1) ] and five-day [ (CAR( -2, +2) ] window around the restatement announcement date. CAR is computed by subtracting from the daily returns of individual firms the concurrent, equally-weighted market return in the same market capitalization decile; the abnormal return is then cumulated over the window to compute the window returns. To test H1A (the joint effect), we include JOINTMWREST 

as an indicator variable set to one if the firm discloses both a restatement and an accompanying MW, and to zero other-wise. JOINTMWREST tests whether the price reaction differs across the joint and non-MW reporters. To test H1B (the order effect), we replace JOINTMWREST with two separate indicator variables: TIMELY , set to one if the firm makes a timely MW disclosure and to zero otherwise; and NONTIMELY , set to one if the firm makes a non-timely MW disclosure and to zero otherwise. We also control for factors that affect market returns following prior research (Burks, 2011; Huang, 2010; Palm-rose et al., 2004). The first group of controls relates to the characteristics of the restatement. MAG , the magnitude of the restatement, is measured as the cumulative change in net income over the restating periods divided by the total value of the given firm 's assets at the end of the fiscal year prior to the restatement announcement. We pre-dict a positive coefficient on MAG as returns should decrease the more the restated income falls below the originally reported numbers. We incorporate an indicator variable, FRAUD , to control for restatements that involve irregulari-ties. Fraud restatements raise questions about managers’ credibility and therefore are more penalized by the market (Hennes, Leone, & Miller, 2008). PERSIST refers to the number of periods restated. We expect PERSIST to associate negatively with market returns. We also include PERVASIVE to measure the number of account groups being affected by the restatement. The account groups include revenues, cost of sales, operating expenses, non-operating expenses, merger-related, and other items. The more account groups affected, the higher the negative effect on stock returns. We also include an indicator variable, REVENUE , to control for the impact of revenue restatements, which have been found to elicit more negative impact on returns compared to other types of restatements (e.g., Rice et al., 2015). We include SEC to distinguish restatements that involve SEC investigations from other restatements as they might raise questions about managers’ and auditors’ integrity, thereby eventually triggering more adverse consequences for the firm. Finally, we control for the channel of disclosing a restatement by including MATERIAL , an indicator set to one if the restatement is announced in a non-routine disclosure (8-K or press release), and to zero otherwise. 13 13 We add MATERIAL to distinguish between non-reliance and revision restatements. According to Choudhary et al. (2016), a “non-reliance restatement” requires a statement of non-reliance for that period (commonly disclosed via 8-K filing), revised financial statements for that period, and a revised audit opinion 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 78 HE ET AL .

Hypotheses 1A, 2A, 3A (the joint effect): Comparing stock price reacon, opon market reacon, and ligaon threats across non-MW reporters (A) and joint MW/restatement reporters (B + C). 

Hypotheses 1B, 2B, 3B (the order effect): Comparing stock price reacon, opon market reacon, and ligaon threats across mely MW reporters (B) and non-mely MW reporters (C). 

F I G U R E 1 An illustration of the samples of joint MW/restatement, non-MW, timely MW, and non-timely MW reporters The second set of controls relates to firms’ characteristics. Here we control for firm size ( SIZE ), measured as the natural logarithm of total assets at the end of the fiscal year prior to the restatement to account for the difference in information environments between small and large firms. Investors in large firms are more likely to have access to news prior to their public disclosure than are investors in small firms (Collins, Kothari, & Rayburn, 1987), which will likely make larger firms’ disclosures less informative. We include CAR( -120, -2) to control for the cross-sectional effects of historical stock performance on current market returns, where CAR( -120, -2) represents the mean abnormal returns over the ( -120, -2) window relative to the restatement announcement date (Palmrose et al., 2004). We finally control for firm 's leverage, LEVERAGE , measured as long-term debt divided by the total assets at the end of the fiscal year prior to the restatement. 

4.2.2 Options market reaction 

We use the following model to investigate whether the market response to restatements is reflected in the price of derivative securities—i.e., options: 

Ln 

( ?? rest 

?? pre 

)

= ?? + ?? 1JOINTMWREST (TIMELY + NONTIMELY ) + ?? 2MAG + ?? 3FRAUD + ?? 4PERSIST 

+ ?? 5PERVASIVE + ?? 6REVENUE + ?? 7SEC + ?? 8MATERIAL + ?? 9SIZE + ?? 10 LEVERAGE 

+ ?? 11 LN (? VIX ) + ?? 12 BM + Year + Industry + ?? (2) for that period with discussion of the error in the auditor 's report. A revision restatement arises from errors that are considered immaterial to each prior period when considered in isolation, but in aggregate would distort current-period financials if they were to be recorded in current-period financials. The company revises prior-period comparable financials in current-period filings but does not file revised filings for the prior period. Accordingly, we expect restatements disclosed through different channels to have varying effects on market returns. 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License HE ET AL . 79 

We examine the effects of restatements on market uncertainty by comparing the implied volatility around the restatement announcement date to the implied volatility before the restatement. Specifically, we compute the average implied volatility during the three days around restatements [ ?? rest , measured over days ( -1, +1)] and before restate-ments [ ?? pre , measured in days ( -10, -2)]. Following Rogers et al. (2009), we use Ln (?? rest /?? pre ) to capture the change in implied volatility, with value greater (less) than zero suggesting an increase (decrease) in the implied volatility. The cal-culation of the underlying implied volatilities is based on a binominal tree, which takes into account the early exercise of the option and the expected dividends to be paid in the future of the life of the option. For the standardized options, implied volatilities are derived from hypothetical at-the-money options and are measured with different durations. We use the standardized options because options traded in the option market vary in terms of the strike price and days to expiration. Following prior research, we report results using options with durations of 30, 91, and 152 days. Since we intend to capture the average effect of restatements on market uncertainty, standardized options with different dura-tions will reduce measurement error and reflect both short-term and long-run effects. Finally, in addition to the set of control variables used in the equity market analysis, we control for the natural logarithm of the market volatility level by including the Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index [ LN( ?VIX) ], and for the firm 's book-to-market ratio ( BM ). 

4.2.3 Class-action lawsuits 

We estimate the following logistic regression model to analyze the joint and order effects on shareholder litigation, after controlling for restatement and firm characteristics, stock price performance, and ex-ante variation in litigation risk: 

CLASSACTION = ?? + ?? 1JOINTMWREST (TIMELY + NONTIMELY ) + ?? 2MAG + ?? 3FRAUD + ?? 4PERSIST 

+ ?? 5PERVASIVE + ?? 6REVENUE + ?? 7SEC + ?? 8MATERIAL + ?? 9SIZE + ?? 10 CAR (- 120 , -2)+ ?? 11 CAR (- 1, +1) + ?? 12 LITRISK KS _CCMT + Pleading _Standard + Year + Industry + ?? (3) We employ two variations of the dependent variable: CLASSACTION 365 (CLASSACTION 730 ), set to one if a class-action lawsuit is filed against the firm within 365 (730) days following the restatement announcement date and to zero otherwise. Similar to Eq. 1 and Eq. 2, we include variables that capture restatement severity and firm-level con-trols including firm size, and prior stock return performance. Additionally, we include LITRISK KS_CCMT as a proxy for firm-specific litigation risk developed by Kim and Skinner (2012) and modified by Cazier, Christensen, Merkley, and Treu (2016), and indicator variables for pleading legal standards ( Pleading_Standard ) to capture variation in litigation pleading standards across federal circuits (Cazier et al., 2016). 14 We also use the same determinants model (Eq. 3) to examine the effect on (i) the likelihood of dismissal, where the dependent variable, DISMISS , indicates that the lawsuit has been dismissed, and (ii) the settlement amount, where the dependent variable, SETTLE , is the natural logarithm of the amount of settlement from the class action against the restating firm. 14 Cazier et al. (2016—CCMT, hereafter) summarize over-time changes in litigation risk based on pleading standards by US circuits during 1998–2007. Using a quasi-natural experiment, CCMT find that variation in litigation risk across circuits influences non-GAAP reporting, implying that firms’ reporting choices are influenced by litigation threats stemming from the federal court system. After mapping the data on litigation standards summarized by CCMT to our sample period, we identify the following pleading standards relevant to our sample: (i) PSLRA_STRINGENT —for firms domiciled in the Seventh Circuit from April 1, 2006 to December 31, 2007; (ii) PSLRA —for firms domiciled in the Second, Third (until 2008), DC, Fourth (until December 2003), and Seventh Circuits; (iii) 

INTERMEDIATE —for firms domiciled in the First, Third (from 2009 onwards), Fourth (from 2004 onwards), Fifth, Sixth, Eighth, Tenth, and Eleventh Circuits; (iv) SGI—for firms domiciled in the Ninth Circuit. As CCMT provide evidence suggesting that litigation likelihood is not uniform across federal circuits, we follow CCMT methodology by estimating the Kim and Skinner (2012) lawsuit prediction model (Model 2) separately for each standard ( PSLRA_STRINGENT & PSLRA ;

INTERMEDIATE ; SGI ). Additionally, CCMT identify two sources of litigation risk embedded in Kim and Skinner 's (2012) measure of litigation: common (affecting all firms in a given industry or federal circuit), and firm-specific risk that arises from idiosyncratic firm characteristics, and urge researchers to use the relevant litigation metric depending on the construct being studied. As we argue that it is the quality of the underlying ICFR and the associated restatement that drives litigation, our focus is on firm-specific litigation risk. Accordingly, we use the estimated slope coefficients from the estimated models to compute the predicted firm-specific litigation risk ( LITRISK KS_CCMT ). 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 80 HE ET AL .

## 5 EMPIRICAL RESULTS 5.1 Descriptive statistics 

Panel A of Table 2 reports the distribution properties of variables for the full restatement sample and each separate sample partition. The mean abnormal returns over the three-day (five-day) window around restatement announce-ments are significantly negative, averaging -1.3% ( -1.4%) for the full sample; these returns suggest that investors react negatively to the news that prior financial statements were misstated. 15 In addition, Ln (?? rest /?? pre ) is mostly posi-tive except for the 30-day measure, suggesting that market uncertainty increases when firms reveal incremental infor-mation reflecting poor financial reporting quality, causing an increase in return volatility. Around 37% of all restating firms report an MW jointly with the restatement, while only 7.3% of firms are timely reporters. Fraud and revenue restatements, and those involving the SEC, represent 1.9%, 15.8%, and 10.3%, respectively. The univariate statistics also reveal that, on average, restatements involve misstatements that span over an average of two years. We also analyze summary statistics across our sample groups and test the mean difference across the parti-tions. First, we find that the joint MW/restatement reporters ( JOINTMWREST = 1) experience more negative mar-ket reaction, options volatility, and higher likelihood of litigation, compared to firms with stand-alone restatements (JOINTMWREST = 0), suggesting that investors appear to perceive restatements accompanying MW disclosures to have a more adverse effect on financial reporting quality. Evidence on control variables indicates that joint MW-restatement reporters have more fraud- and revenue-related restatements, as well as restatements that are more persistent, per-vasive, and of larger magnitudes. Next, we examine the effect of timely reporting on the reaction to restatements. The univariate statistics in Panel A reveal that both timely and non-timely reporters suffer similar stock and option price reactions to restatements. Inter-estingly, however, timely reporters have more lawsuits dismissed and pay lower settlements, compared to non-timely reporters, implying that timely MW reporting shields firms from litigation sanctions. Statistics on control variables sug-gest that the two subsamples have similar proportions of fraud and revenue-related restatements, and their restate-ments are also similar in magnitude. However, non-timely reporters have restatements that are more pervasive, more likely to involve the SEC, announced in non-routine disclosures, and span over longer periods. Given the significant dif-ferences across our sample groups in multiple restatement and firm characteristics, we also employ a propensity score matching technique to test our hypotheses, besides controlling for these variables in our multivariate analyses. Panel B of Table 2 displays the Pearson correlations between the models’ variables. Joint MW/restatement reporters are negatively associated with stock returns, and are positively associated with both implied volatility and class actions. Both timely and non-timely MW reporters are negatively associated with stock price reaction, indicating that investors react negatively to MW-associated restatements regardless of whether the MW precedes or follows the restatement. Non-timely MW disclosures are positively (negatively) associated with the likelihood of class-action lawsuits (lawsuit dismissals). Restatements with more adverse income effect are associated with more negative stock price reaction, so are fraud, pervasive, revenue restatements, and restatements announced in non-routine disclosures. 

## 5.2 Regression results 5.2.1 Stock price reaction 

Table 3 presents the multivariate regression results of the prediction in H1A that there is no perceptible difference in stock price reaction across joint and non-MW reporters. In Column 1A, JOINTMWREST is significantly negative for the full restatement sample, suggesting that firms that report an MW in conjunction with a restatement experience more negative stock returns compared to firms with stand-alone restatement disclosures. The evidence implies that 15 Consistent with prior research, the magnitude of the negative abnormal returns around restatements has significantly decreased in the post-SOX period. For example, Hranaiova and Byers (2007) document a negative market return of approximately -1.2% for post-SOX restatements. 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License HE ET AL . 81 

> TA B L E 2  Descriptive statistics
> Panel A: Distributional properties of variables across sample partitions Joint MW/restatement reporters Full Sample Joint MW/restatement reporters Non-MW reporters Timely MW reporter Non-timely MW reporters
> N Mean  25%  Median  75%  S.D.  Mean  Mean  t-Statistics  Mean  Mean  t-Statistics Variables  (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  (7)  (8)  (7)-(8)  (10)  (11)  (10)-(11)
> CAR ( -1,  +1)  2,274  -0.013  -0.038  -0.006  0.019  0.077  -0.028  -0.005  -6.888  ***  -0.036  -0.026  -1.410
> CAR ( -2,  +2)  2,274  -0.014  -0.045  -0.008  0.024  0.090  -0.030  -0.005  -6.602  ***  -0.034  -0.029  -0.655
> Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  )30day  1,213  -0.001  -0.063  -0.006  0.049  0.118  0.021  -0.014  5.207  ***  0.023  0.020  0.253
> Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  )91day  1,213  0.006  -0.03  -0.001  0.035  0.084  0.020  -0.002  4.639  ***  0.027  0.017  0.925
> Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  )152day  1,213  0.006  -0.026  0.000  0.029  0.075  0.016  -0.000  3.852  ***  0.022  0.015  0.711
> CLASSACTION 365  1,992  0.112  0.000  0.000  0.000  0.316  0.163  0.083  5.547 ***  0.110  0.178  -2.043  **
> DISMISS 365  224  0.643  0.000  1.000  1.000  0.480  0.575  0.721  -2.293  **  0.824  0.534  2.267  **
> SETTLE 365  224  5.880  0.000  0.000  15.529  7.967  6.955  4.640  2.187  **  2.947  7.616  -2.217  **
> JOINTMWREST  2,274  0.368  0.000  0.000  1.000  0.482  1.000  0.000  N/A  1.000  1.000  N/A
> TIMELY  2,274  0.073  0.000  0.000  0.000  0.261  0.200  0.000  N/A  1.000  0.000  N/A
> NONTIMELY  2,274  0.294  0.000  0.000  1.000  0.456  0.800  0.000  N/A  0.000  1.000  N/A
> MAG  2,274  -0.014  -0.008  0.000  0.000  0.049  -0.022  -0.009  -6.460  ***  -0.016  -0.023  1.384
> FRAUD  2,274  0.019  0.000  0.000  0.000  0.138  0.037  0.009  4.701  ***  0.018  0.042  -1.462
> PERSIST  2,274  2.133  0.748  1.745  2.997  1.911  2.414  1.970  5.382  ***  1.897  2.543  -3.702  ***
> PERVASIVE  2,274  1.398  1.000  1.000  2.000  0.699  1.553  1.307  8.249  ***  1.449  1.580  -1.852  *
> REVENUE  2,274  0.158  0.000  0.000  0.000  0.365  0.214  0.126  5.594  ***  0.174  0.224  -1.425
> SEC  2,274  0.103  0.000  0.000  0.000  0.304  0.112  0.098  1.087  0.048  0.129  -2.963  ***
> MATERIAL  2,274  0.503  0.000  1.000  1.000  0.500  0.726  0.373  17.237  ***  0.665  0.741  -1.991  **
> SIZE  2,274  20.140  18.720  20.128  21.469  2.055  19.820  20.326  -5.694  ***  19.304  19.949  -4.094  ***
> CAR( -120,  -2)  2,274  0.011  -0.118  0.001  0.128  0.327  -0.008  0.022  -2.059  **  -0.002  -0.009  0.300 (Continues) 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

82 HE ET AL .

> TA B L E 2  (Continued)
> Panel A: Distributional properties of variables across sample partitions Joint MW/restatement reporters Full Sample Joint MW/restatement reporters Non-MW reporters Timely MW reporter Non-timely MW reporters
> N Mean  25%  Median  75%  S.D.  Mean  Mean  t-Statistics  Mean  Mean  t-Statistics Variables  (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  (7)  (8)  (7)-(8)  (10)  (11)  (10)-(11)
> LEVERAGE  2,274  0.182  0.002  0.108  0.293  0.209  0.156  0.197  -4.511  ***  0.158  0.156  0.151
> LN( ?VIX)  1,213  0.001  -0.067  -0.011  0.052  0.107  0.003  -0.001  0.695  0.003  0.004  -0.024
> BM  1,213  0.588  0.285  0.511  0.786  1.067  0.564  0.598  -0.724  0.626  0.556  1.299
> LITRISK KS_CCMT  1,992  -3.517  -4.597  -3.628  -2.658  1.543  -3.572  -3.485  -1.203  -3.851  -3.497  -2.607  ***
> Panel B: Correlation matrix Variable  (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  (7)  (8)  (9)  (10)  (11)  (12)  (13)  (14)  (15)  (16)  (17)  (18)  (19)  (20)  (21)  (22)  (23)  (24)
> (1)  CAR ( -1,  +1)  1(2)  CAR ( -2,  +2)  0.85  * 1(3)  Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  )30day  -0.25  *-0.25  * 1(4)  Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  )91day  -0.28  *-0.28  * 0.76  * 1(5)  Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  )152day  -0.31  -0.31  0.65  * 0.87  * 1(6)  CLASSACTION 365  -0.23  *-0.21  * 0.11  * 0.13  * 0.14  * 1(7)  DISMISS 365  0.24  * 0.22  *-0.27  *-0.29  *-0.27  * N/A  1(8)  SETTLE 365  -0.23  *-0.21  * 0.27  * 0.29  * 0.28  * N/A  -1.00  * 1(9)  JOINTMWREST  -0.14  *-0.13  * 0.16  * 0.14  * 0.12  * 0.12  *-0.15  * 0.15  * 1(10)  TIMELY  -0.09  *-0.07  * 0.06  * 0.07  * 0.06  -0.00  0.11  -0.11  0.37  * 1(11)  NONTIMELY  -0.10  *-0.11  * 0.13  * 0.12  * 0.10  * 0.13  *-0.21  * 0.20  0.85  *-0.19  * 1(12)  MAG  0.10  * 0.10  *-0.12  *-0.09  *-0.07  *-0.11  * 0.24  *-0.25  *-0.13  *-0.02  -0.13  * 1(13)  FRAUD  -0.08  *-0.07  * 0.07  * 0.05  0.07  * 0.07  *-0.06  0.06  0.10 *-0.00  0.11  *-0.02 1 (14)  PERSIST  -0.02  -0.02  0.07  * 0.06  * 0.05  0.13  *-0.09  0.11  0.11 *-0.03  0.14  *-0.15  * 0.07  * 1(15)  PERVASIVE  -0.10  *-0.09  * 0.08  * 0.12  * 0.12  * 0.14  *-0.21  * 0.20  * 0.17  * 0.02  0.17  *-0.06  * 0.19  * 0.07  * 1(Continues) 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

HE ET AL . 83 

> TA B L E 2  (Continued)
> Panel B: Correlation matrix Variable  (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  (7)  (8)  (9)  (10)  (11)  (12)  (13)  (14)  (15)  (16)  (17)  (18)  (19)  (20)  (21)  (22)  (23)  (24)
> (16)  REVENUE  -0.13  *-0.12  * 0.08  * 0.09  * 0.10  * 0.14  *-0.18  * 0.16  * 0.12  * 0.01  0.12  *-0.08  * 0.09  * 0.02  0.40  * 1(17)  SEC  -0.03  -0.05  * 0.09  * 0.08  * 0.10  * 0.08  *-0.15  * 0.18  * 0.02  -0.05  * 0.05  *-0.15  * 0.11  * 0.22  * 0.07  * 0.07  * 1(18)  MATERIAL  -0.09  *-0.08  * 0.17  * 0.10  * 0.09  * 0.11  * 0.02  -0.02  0.34  * 0.09  * 0.31  *-0.13  * 0.04  0.21  * 0.11  * 0.11  * 0.14  * 1(19)  SIZE  0.04  0.02  -0.04  -0.02  -0.02  0.20  * 0.16  *-0.12  -0.12  *-0.11  *-0.06  * 0.16  * 0.03  0.13  * 0.02  -0.03  0.03  -0.03  1(20)  CAR( -120,  -2)  0.04  * 0.11  *-0.02  -0.02  -0.02  -0.08  * 0.18  *-0.17  -0.04  *-0.01  -0.04  0.09  *-0.03  -0.01  0.01  -0.03  -0.02  -0.06  *-0.04  1(21)  LEVERAGE  -0.02  0.00  -0.02  -0.02  -0.02  -0.02  0.01  -0.00  -0.09  *-0.03  -0.08  * 0.06  *-0.00  -0.01  0.06  *-0.01  -0.01  -0.02  0.26  * 0.03 1 (22)  LN( ?VIX)  -0.05  -0.07  * 0.26  * 0.26  * 0.25  *-0.01  -0.16  * 0.17  * 0.03  0.04  0.01  -0.04  -0.04  0.07  *-0.06  -0.07  0.03  0.02  0.03  -0.05 0.02  1(23)  BM  0.01  0.00  0.01  -0.01  -0.00  0.04  0.20  *-0.19  * 0.00  0.02  -0.00  0.05  0.01  -0.00  0.05  0.01  -0.01  0.04  0.01  0.03 0.87  * -0.01 1 (24)  LITRISK KS_CCMT  -0.07  *-0.08  * 0.04  0.07  * 0.08  * 0.28  *-0.06  0.10  -0.03  -0.06  * 0.01  0.00  0.01  0.11  * 0.05  * 0.03  0.07  *-0.00  0.67  *-0.14  * 0.16  * -0.00 0.09  * 1
> Notes : Panel A reports the descriptive statistics of the study variables, along with two-tailed  t-statistics for mean differences across the sample partitions. Joint MW/restatement reporters consist of restating firms that disclose an MW concurrent with, before, or after the restatement. Non-MW reporters consist of restating firms that do not disclose an MW either before, concurrent with, or after the restatement. Timely MW reporters consist of restating firms that disclose an MW prior to the restatement. Non-timely MW reporters consist of restating firms that disclose an MW concurrent with, or following the restatement. ***, **, and * in Panel A indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Panel B shows the Pearson correlations between the study variables. For variables that appear in more than one regression equation/model, we base the correlations on the largest sample used to examine the model in which that variable appears. For variables that are not included together in the same regression model [e.g.,  CAR( -1,  +1)  and  LN( ?VIX) ], their correlations are based on the sample constructed from merging the corresponding samples for these models.  * in Panel B indicates significance at the 1% or 5% level.  CAR( -1,  +1)  and  CAR( -2,  +2)  are the size-adjusted cumulative abnormal returns over the three- and five-day window around the restatement announcement date, respectively.  Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  ) measures the effect of restatement on market uncertainty using different standard option durations (30 day, 91 day, and 152 day), where  ?? rest  is the stock option 's average implied volatility of three days [ -1,  +1] surrounding restatement and  ?? pre  is the average implied volatility of days [ -10,  -2] relative to the restatement announcement date.  CLASSACTION  365  is an indicator variable set to one if a class action lawsuit was filed against the firm within 365 days from the restatement announcement date, and to zero otherwise.  DISMISS  365  is an indicator variable set to one if the class action lawsuit is dismissed, and to zero otherwise.  SETTLE  365  is the natural logarithm of the amount of settlement from the class action against the restating firm.  JOINTMWREST  is an indicator variable set to one for restatements that are associated with an MW disclosure, and to zero otherwise.  TIMELY  is an indicator variable set to one if the firm discloses an MW prior to the restatement, and to zero otherwise.  NONTIMELY  is an indicator variable set to one if the firm discloses an MW concurrent with, or following the restatement, and to zero otherwise.  MAG  is the cumulative change in net income for the restated periods divided by the total assets at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement.  FRAUD  is an indicator variable set to one if the restatement involves fraud, and to zero otherwise.  PERSIST  is the number of years restated.  PERVASIVE  is the number of account groups affected by the restatement.  REVENUE  is an indicator variable set to one if the restatement involves revenue-recognition misstatements, and to zero otherwise.  SEC  is an indicator variable set to one if the restatement involves an SEC investigation, and to zero otherwise.  MATERIAL  is an indicator variable set to one if the restatement is announced in non-routine disclosures, such as 8-Ks or press releases, and to zero if the restatement is filed in periodic filings, such as 10-K and 10-Q.  SIZE  is the natural logarithm of total assets at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement.  CAR( -120,  -2)  is the size-adjusted cumulative abnormal returns over ( -120,  -2) days relative to the restatement announcement date.  LEVERAGE  is the total long-term debt divided by total assets at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement.  LN( ?VIX)  is the natural logarithm of the change of Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index (VIX), measured as the average of VIX of days [ -1,  +1] divided by the average of VIX over days [ -10,  -2] relative to the restatement announcement date.  BM  is the book to market ratio, measured as the ratio of firm 's equity to market value.  LITRISK  KS_CCMT  is the predicted value of firm-specific litigation risk based on Kim and Skinner 's (2012) litigation model (Model 2 in Table 7) estimated separately for each pleading standard applied by federal circuits (i)  PSLRA  and  PSLRA_STRINGENT , (ii)  INTERMEDIATE , and (iii)
> SGI , following Cazier et al. (2016). 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

84 HE ET AL .

TA B L E 3 The effect of joint MW and restatement disclosures on stock price reaction to restatements 

ALL RESTATEMENTS ADVERSE RESTATEMENTS CAR( -1, +1) CAR( -2, +2) CAR( -1, +1) CAR( -2, +2) Dependent variable (1A) (1B) (2A) (2B) (3A) (3B) (4A) (4B) 

JOINTMWREST -0.018 *** -0.021 *** -0.021 *** -0.024 *** (-4.88) (-4.80) (-4.97) (-5.02) 

TIMELY -0.028 *** -0.027 *** -0.035 *** -0.038 *** (-4.32) (-3.58) (-4.62) (-4.43) 

NONTIMELY -0.016 *** -0.019 *** -0.017 *** -0.021 *** (-3.95) (-4.15) (-3.95) (-4.07) 

MAG 0.122 *** 0.124 *** 0.127 *** 0.128 *** 0.114 *** 0.117 *** 0.108 ** 0.111 *** (3.55) (3.60) (3.17) (3.20) (3.07) (3.15) (2.52) (2.59) 

FRAUD -0.033 *** -0.034 *** -0.029 ** -0.029 ** -0.032 *** -0.033 *** -0.028 ** -0.029 ** (-2.78) (-2.82) (-2.07) (-2.09) (-2.64) (-2.69) (-1.97) (-2.02) 

PERSIST 0.000 0.000 0.001 0.001 0.000 -0.000 0.000 0.000 (0.24) (0.12) (0.56) (0.50) (0.03) (-0.08) (0.37) (0.27) 

PERVASIVE -0.003 -0.003 -0.003 -0.003 -0.002 -0.002 -0.003 -0.003 (-1.07) (-1.10) (-0.87) (-0.89) (-0.83) (-0.85) (-0.80) (-0.81) 

REVENUE -0.022 *** -0.022 *** -0.024 *** -0.024 *** -0.025 *** -0.025 *** -0.028 *** -0.028 *** (-4.61) (-4.62) (-4.20) (-4.20) (-4.74) (-4.76) (-4.50) (-4.51) 

SEC -0.002 -0.002 -0.009 -0.009 -0.003 -0.004 -0.010 -0.011 (-0.35) (-0.45) (-1.36) (-1.41) (-0.55) (-0.66) (-1.44) (-1.53) 

MATERIAL -0.000 -0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.001 -0.001 -0.002 -0.002 (-0.02) (-0.03) (0.02) (0.02) (-0.32) (-0.36) (-0.41) (-0.45) 

SIZE 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 (1.23) (1.11) (0.64) (0.58) (1.00) (0.82) (0.60) (0.44) 

CAR( -120, -2) 0.006 0.006 0.025 *** 0.025 *** 0.009 0.008 0.027 *** 0.027 *** (1.19) (1.20) (4.34) (4.34) (1.58) (1.56) (4.37) (4.35) 

LEVERAGE -0.018 ** -0.017 ** -0.010 -0.010 -0.021 ** -0.020 ** -0.010 -0.009 (-2.19) (-2.14) (-1.03) (-1.01) (-2.29) (-2.23) (-0.96) (-0.90) 

Year fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 

Industry fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 

p-value: TIMELY 

= NONTIMELY 

0.06 * 0.29 0.03 ** 0.05 ** 

N 2,274 2,274 2,274 2,274 1,912 1,912 1,912 1,912 Adjusted R2 0.040 0.041 0.045 0.045 0.048 0.050 0.056 0.058 

Notes : The table reports the regression results of estimating the effect of joint MW/restatement, timely MW, and non-timely MW disclosures on the stock price reaction to restatement announcements. The sample groups consist of restating firms that disclose an MW concurrent with, before, or after the restatement (joint MW/restatement reporters); restating firms that dis-close an MW prior to the restatement (timely reporters), restating firms that disclose an MW concurrent with, or following the restatement (non-timely reporters), and restating firms that do not report MWs at all (non-MW reporters). CAR( -1, +1) 

and CAR( -2, +2) are the size-adjusted cumulative abnormal returns over the three- and five-day window around the restate-ment announcement date, respectively. JOINTMWREST is an indicator variable set to one for restatements that are associated with an MW disclosure, and to zero otherwise. TIMELY is an indicator variable set to one if the firm discloses an MW prior to the restatement, and to zero otherwise. NONTIMELY is an indicator variable set to one if the firm discloses an MW concur-rent with, or following the restatement, and to zero otherwise. MAG is the cumulative change in net income for the restated (Continues) 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License HE ET AL . 85 

TA B L E 3 (Continued) periods divided by the total assets at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement. FRAUD is an indicator vari-able set to one if the restatement involves fraud, and to zero otherwise. PERSIST is the number of years restated. PERVASIVE 

is the number of account groups affected by the restatement. REVENUE is an indicator variable set to one if the restatement involves revenue-recognition misstatements, and to zero otherwise. SEC is an indicator variable set to one if the restatement involves an SEC investigation, and to zero otherwise. MATERIAL is an indicator variable set to one if the restatement is announced in non-routine disclosures, such as 8-Ks or press releases, and to zero if the restatement is filed in periodic filings, such as 10-K and 10-Q. SIZE is the natural logarithm of total assets at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement. 

CAR( -120, -2) is the size-adjusted cumulative abnormal returns over ( -120, -2) days relative to the restatement announce-ment date. LEVERAGE is the total long-term debt divided by total assets at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement. 

t-Statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. joint reporters are perceived to have lower financial reporting quality compared to non-MW reporters, since the joint disclosures would indicate more serious accounting breakdowns. We then assess investors’ responses to restatements conditional on prior MW disclosures (H1B) to analyze whether the stock price reaction varies with the timeliness of MW reporting. In Column 1B, we replace JOINTMWREST with two dichotomous variables: TIMELY for MWs disclosed before restatements and NONTIMELY for MWs disclosed with, or after, restatements. Results from this test indicate that both TIMELY and NONTIMELY are negatively associated with market returns around restatement announcements, suggesting that restatements trigger significantly negative mar-ket returns, regardless of the whether they are accompanied by a timely or non-timely MW. Timely reporters, however, appear to experience more negative price reaction to restatements compared to non-timely reporters ( F-value = 3.33; 

p = 0.06). The stronger negative reaction for timely reporters can indicate that investors perceive the early MW dis-closure to signal more pervasive control-related problems, which have possibly warranted the earlier MW disclosure. Another interesting possibility is that investors penalize firms whose auditors discern the timely MW but failed to modify the extent of audit procedures accordingly to lower detection risk by discovering all concurrent misstatements. Although auditors of non-timely reporters have failed to uncover the timely MW in the first place—which also implies lower audit quality—the evidence of poor financial reporting quality is more explicit in the case of timely MW reporters, which further gives rise to the more adverse effects associated with restatements by these firms. Finally, the negative reaction to restatements by non-timely reporters provides an interesting insight since it indicates that the restatement is interpreted to have emerged from an ICFR breach even though such a breakdown has not been formally disclosed. In Columns 2A and 2B, we analyze the market reaction using five-day window returns, finding similar results to those reported in Columns 1A and 1B. Given the evidence presented by Callen, Livnat, and Segal (2006) that the mar-ket reaction is muted for income-increasing restatements, we also restrict the sample to income-decreasing restate-ments, and find consistent evidence to the baseline results (Columns 3A–4B). Taken together, the results from the equity market analysis (H1A and H1B) suggest that investors react more negatively to restatements accompanied with MW disclosures—regardless of their timing—compared to restatements without accompanying MWs. Amongst joint reporters, timely reporters appear to suffer more negative returns than non-timely reporters, which further implies that investors indeed incorporate the timeliness of MW disclosures in making assessments of firms’ reporting quality. Control variables exhibit signs in the expected direction. MAG is positively associated with market returns, while fraud and revenue-related restatements have negative effects. Additionally, firms with high leverage suffer more nega-tive reactions around restatements, as possibly indicating greater incentives for managers of these firms to manipulate earnings to meet their debt covenants. 

5.2.2 Options price reaction 

Table 4 tests the options market predictions in H2A and H2B. Consistent with the univariate analysis, our multivariate regression results indicate that JOINTMWREST is positive significantly across options with different durations for both the entire and income-decreasing restatement samples. This evidence implies that the joint disclosure of an MW and restatement induces more return variability as investors become more uncertain about a firm 's value. 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 86 HE ET AL .

> TA B L E 4  The effect of joint MW and restatement disclosures on options price reaction to restatements
> ALL RESTATEMENTS  ADVERSE RESTATEMENTS
> Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  ) Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  ) Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  ) Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  ) Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  ) Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  )
> 30 DAYS  91 DAYS  152 DAYS  30 DAYS  91 DAYS  152 DAYS Dependent variable  (1A)  (1B)  (2A)  (2B)  (3A)  (3B)  (4A)  (4B)  (5A)  (5B)  (6A)  (6B)
> JOINTMWREST  0.015 **  0.014 ***  0.009 * 0.025 ***  0.017 **  0.010 *
> (2.03)  (2.65)  (1.88)  (3.00)  (3.00)  (1.91)
> TIMELY  0.024 * 0.026 ***  0.017 **  0.032 **  0.028 ***  0.015 (1.76)  (2.73)  (2.04)  (2.13)  (2.63)  (1.58)
> NONTIMELY  0.016 **  0.014 **  0.010 * 0.026 ***  0.018 ***  0.012 **
> (2.00)  (2.51)  (1.91)  (2.99)  (2.92)  (2.09)
> MAG  -0.161  **  -0.160  **  -0.073  -0.072  -0.043  -0.041  -0.151  **  -0.149  **  -0.061  -0.060  -0.035  -0.033 (-2.38)  (-2.37)  (-1.52)  (-1.50)  (-0.99)  (-0.96)  (-2.12)  (-2.10)  (-1.22)  (-1.20)  (-0.76)  (-0.72)
> FRAUD  0.038  * 0.038  * 0.014  0.014  0.020  0.020  0.036  0.036  0.012  0.012  0.020  0.019 (1.74)  (1.74)  (0.88)  (0.90)  (1.41)  (1.41)  (1.64)  (1.63)  (0.78)  (0.79)  (1.38)  (1.35)
> PERSIST  0.000  0.000  0.000  0.000  -0.000  -0.000  0.000  0.000  0.001  0.001  0.000  0.000 (0.16)  (0.20)  (0.11)  (0.20)  (-0.14)  (-0.08)  (0.09)  (0.11)  (0.41)  (0.46)  (0.28)  (0.28)
> PERVASIVE  0.005  0.005  0.009  ***  0.009  ***  0.008  ***  0.008  **  0.003  0.002  0.009  **  0.009  **  0.008  **  0.008  ** (1.02)  (0.99)  (2.66)  (2.63)  (2.60)  (2.56)  (0.50)  (0.45)  (2.39)  (2.34)  (2.36)  (2.30)
> REVENUE  0.013  0.013  0.007  0.007  0.011  * 0.010  * 0.010  0.009  0.003  0.002  0.007  0.007 (1.32)  (1.31)  (1.10)  (1.09)  (1.72)  (1.70)  (0.92)  (0.91)  (0.36)  (0.33)  (1.04)  (1.01)
> SEC  0.011  0.012  0.010  0.010  0.015  **  0.016  **  0.012  0.012  0.008  0.009  0.013  * 0.013  *(1.09)  (1.12)  (1.32)  (1.39)  (2.29)  (2.34)  (1.00)  (1.03)  (1.04)  (1.11)  (1.78)  (1.80)
> MATERIAL  0.020  **  0.019  **  0.005  0.005  0.003  0.003  0.020 **  0.020  **  0.009  0.009  0.006  0.006 (2.28)  (2.23)  (0.88)  (0.80)  (0.55)  (0.46)  (2.16)  (2.10)  (1.37)  (1.30)  (1.07)  (0.99)
> SIZE  -0.003  -0.003  -0.001  -0.000  -0.001  -0.001  -0.002  -0.001  -0.000  0.000  -0.001  -0.001 (-1.50)  (-1.38)  (-0.42)  (-0.21)  (-0.62)  (-0.44)  (-0.62)  (-0.53)  (-0.14)  (0.01)  (-0.47)  (-0.36) (Continues) 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

HE ET AL . 87 

> TA B L E 4  (Continued)
> ALL RESTATEMENTS  ADVERSE RESTATEMENTS
> Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  ) Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  ) Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  ) Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  ) Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  ) Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  )
> 30 DAYS  91 DAYS  152 DAYS  30 DAYS  91 DAYS  152 DAYS Dependent variable  (1A)  (1B)  (2A)  (2B)  (3A)  (3B)  (4A)  (4B)  (5A)  (5B)  (6A)  (6B)
> LEVERAGE  0.010  0.010  0.006  0.006  -0.000  -0.000  0.018  0.018  0.008  0.008  0.005  0.005 (0.73)  (0.73)  (0.61)  (0.62)  (-0.01)  (-0.00)  (1.13)  (1.13)  (0.72)  (0.72)  (0.48)  (0.47)
> LN( ?VIX)  0.277  ***  0.276  ***  0.203  ***  0.202  ***  0.176  ***  0.175  ***  0.285  ***  0.285  ***  0.196  ***  0.196  ***  0.169  ***  0.169  *** (8.86)  (8.84)  (9.22)  (9.19)  (8.87)  (8.84)  (8.43)  (8.42)  (8.22)  (8.22)  (7.85)  (7.84)
> BM  -0.011  -0.011  -0.008  -0.009  -0.002  -0.002  -0.003  -0.004  -0.008  -0.008  -0.001  -0.001 (-0.81)  (-0.83)  (-0.92)  (-0.95)  (-0.18)  (-0.20)  (-0.23)  (-0.23)  (-0.76)  (-0.77)  (-0.11)  (-0.11)
> Year fixed effects  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
> Industry fixed effects  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
> p-value: TIMELY  = NONTIMELY  0.56  0.21  0.36  0.69  0.35  0.72
> N 1,213  1,213  1,213  1,213  1,213  1,213  1,049  1,049  1,049  1,049  1,049  1,049 Adjusted  R2 0.137  0.138  0.116  0.119  0.111  0.113  0.148  0.149  0.123  0.125  0.110  0.112
> Notes : The table reports the regression results of estimating the effect of joint MW/restatement, timely MW, and non-timely MW disclosures on the option market reaction to restatement announcements. The sample groups consist of restating firms that disclose an MW concurrent with, before, or after the restatement (joint MW/restatement reporters); restating firms that disclose an MW prior to the restatement (timely reporters), restating firms that disclose an MW concurrent with, or following the restatement (non-timely reporters), and restating firms that do not report MWs at all (non-MW reporters).  Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  ) measures the effect of restatement on market uncertainty using different standard option durations (30 day, 91 day, and 152 day), where  ?? rest  is the stock option 's average implied volatility of three days [ -1,  +1] surrounding restatement and  ?? pre  is the average implied volatility of days [ -10,  -2] relative to the restatement announcement date.  JOINTMWREST  is an indicator variable set to one for restatements that are associated with an MW disclosure, and to zero otherwise.  TIMELY  is an indicator variable set to one if the firm discloses an MW prior to the restatement, and to zero otherwise.  NONTIMELY  is an indicator variable set to one if the firm discloses an MW concurrent with, or following the restatement, and to zero otherwise.  MAG  is the cumulative change in net income for the restated periods divided by the total assets at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement.
> FRAUD  is an indicator variable set to one if the restatement involves fraud, and to zero otherwise.  PERSIST  is the number of years restated.  PERVASIVE  is the number of account groups affected by the restatement.  REVENUE  is an indicator variable set to one if the restatement involves revenue-recognition misstatements, and to zero otherwise.  SEC  is an indicator variable set to one if the restatement involves an SEC investigation, and to zero otherwise.  MATERIAL  is an indicator variable set to one if the restatement is announced in non-routine disclosures, such as 8-Ks or press releases, and to zero if the restatement is filed in periodic filings, such as 10-K and 10-Q.  SIZE  is the natural logarithm of total assets at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement.
> LEVERAGE  is the total long-term debt divided by total assets at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement . LN( ?VIX)  is the natural logarithm of the change of Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index (VIX), measured as the average of VIX of days [ -1,  +1] divided by the average of VIX over days [ -10,  -2] relative to the restatement announcement date.  BM  is the book to market ratio, measured as the ratio of firm 's equity to market value.  t-Statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

88 HE ET AL .

We also examine whether the increased options volatility is attributable to timely or non-timely MW disclosures. The coefficients on both TIMELY and NONTIMELY are significantly positive, suggesting that the implied volatility increases more for restatements accompanied by timely or non-timely disclosures than it does for stand-alone restatements. However, there is no significant difference between TIMELY and NONTIMELY across options with differ-ent durations, indicating that joint disclosures—regardless of the order in which the MW is reported—lead to higher uncertainty. Results on control variables reveal that the coefficient of MAG is negative because the more “negative” the effect of restatements on a firm 's earnings, the more investors are concerned about the firm 's reporting quality; at the same time, the “positive” restatements decrease uncertainty by mitigating investors’ concerns. FRAUD is significant for the options with short durations (30 days) and PERVASIVE is significant for options with long durations (91 days and 152 days), which indicate that short- and long-term volatility levels are strongly affected by the severity and perva-siveness of the restatements, respectively. 

5.2.3 Class-action lawsuits 

Table 5 displays estimates from the class-action logistic regression model developed in Eq. 3 for all restatements (Panel A) and adverse restatements (Panel B). In Panel A, Column 1A, JOINTMWREST is significantly positive, suggesting that restating firms face more litigation threats when an MW accompanies the restatement. In Column 1B, we test the effect of the timeliness of MW reporting on the likelihood of class actions, finding that both TIMELY and NONTIMELY 

are positive, and have similar effects on the likelihood of litigation. This type of evidence indicates that investors view both timely and late disclosures as a signal of firm 's wrongdoing: timely reporters are penalized because managers have either failed to remediate the MW or intentionally exploited the weak controls to manage earnings; while non-timely reporters are sanctioned because of their failure to discern control deficiencies leading to the restate-ment in a timely manner. Examining the likelihood of litigation for adverse restatements in Panel B provides similar inferences. We next examine the joint and order effects on lawsuit dismissals and settlement amounts, respectively. Our results reveal that joint MW/restatement disclosures do not affect the probability of lawsuit dismissal or settlement amounts (Panel A, Columns 2A and 3A). In contrast, timely MW reporting results in higher likelihood of dismissal (Column 2B) and lower settlement amounts (Column 3B). As timely reporting reflects that managers/auditors have surfaced at least some internal control deficiencies, plaintiffs would likely have weaker legal grounds to secure a conviction of willful misconduct and prove their “intention to deceive”. While our results do not reveal significant effects of non-timely reporting ( NONTIMELY ) on dismissal likelihood and settlements when analyzing the sample of all 

restatements, examining the adverse restatements in Table 5, Panel B provides an interesting insight, because we also find that non-timely reporters both are less likely to have their cases dismissed (Column 5B) and pay larger settlements (Column 6B). Taken together, the evidence from the litigation analysis implies that when firms are more forthcoming about the true status of their internal control systems, it becomes more difficult for plaintiffs to allege that these firms have acted with scienter to mislead them. On the other hand, late MW disclosures increase the probability of subsequent litigation and settlement amounts. That is, firms that disclose that their ICFRs are effective and then restate their financials expose themselves to allegations that management has willfully omitted or misrepresented material infor-mation (i.e., that controls were ineffective). These results are entirely consistent with the institutional arrangements surrounding a class action. An early MW disclosure involves a trade-off between admitting knowledge of weak-nesses (increased probability of establishing scienter) and a prompt disclosure (decreased probability of establishing scienter). In contrast, a subsequent disclosure of MW leaves the firm in trouble for having concealed information. Finally, our results on the association between the timeliness of MW disclosure and the resolution of class-action lawsuits are also consistent with practitioners’ views that auditors who have uncovered control weakness areas and identify them to management satisfy their duties under GAAS even if the misstatement has never been found (Hurson, 2006). 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License HE ET AL . 89 

> TA B L E 5  The effect of joint MW and restatement disclosures on class action lawsuits
> Panel A: All restatements ALL RESTATEMENTS
> CLASSACTION 365  DISMISS 365  SETTLE 365  CLASSACTION 730  DISMISS 730  SETTLE 730
> Dependent variable  (1A)  (1B)  (2A)  (2B)  (3A)  (3B)  (4A)  (4B)  (5A)  (5B)  (6A)  (6B)
> JOINTMWREST  0.703 ***  -0.226  0.677  0.374 **  -0.383  1.068 (3.62)  (-0.49)  (0.52)  (2.23)  (-1.08)  (1.01)
> TIMELY  0.687 **  2.020 **  -4.762 **  0.193  1.138  -3.124 (2.05)  (2.12)  (-2.00)  (0.64)  (1.53)  (-1.55)
> NONTIMELY  0.706 ***  -0.361  1.221  0.411 **  -0.527  1.572 (3.52)  (-0.76)  (0.94)  (2.35)  (-1.45)  (1.47)
> MAG  -4.274  ***  -4.271  ***  6.656  * 6.736  * -16.554  * -16.260  * -5.073  ***  -5.037  ***  4.178  3.967  -15.066  * -14.278  *(-2.79)  (-2.79)  (1.82)  (1.78)  (-1.92)  (-1.92)  (-3.56)  (-3.53)  (1.57)  (1.45)  (-1.92)  (-1.83)
> FRAUD  0.094  0.093  0.296  0.343  -1.700  -2.007  0.267  0.249  0.247  0.352  -1.320  -1.641 (0.19)  (0.19)  (0.35)  (0.40)  (-0.64)  (-0.77)  (0.58)  (0.54)  (0.34)  (0.47)  (-0.56)  (-0.70)
> PERSIST  0.127  ***  0.126  ***  -0.033  -0.030  0.077  0.048  0.105  ***  0.103  ***  -0.071  -0.060  0.219  0.175 (3.05)  (3.03)  (-0.34)  (-0.31)  (0.27)  (0.17)  (2.88)  (2.80)  (-0.95)  (-0.78)  (0.92)  (0.74)
> PERVASIVE  0.143  0.143  -0.256  -0.263  0.729  0.710  0.091  0.090  -0.189  -0.217  0.614  0.648 (1.23)  (1.23)  (-1.13)  (-1.14)  (1.06)  (1.06)  (0.86)  (0.85)  (-1.02)  (-1.16)  (1.01)  (1.08)
> REVENUE  0.405  * 0.405  * -0.045  -0.050  0.040  0.069  0.194  0.192  -0.211  -0.214  0.536  0.536 (1.78)  (1.78)  (-0.10)  (-0.10)  (0.03)  (0.05)  (0.93)  (0.92)  (-0.54)  (-0.55)  (0.43)  (0.44)
> SEC  0.011  0.011  -0.299  -0.163  1.712  1.572  -0.031  -0.036  0.071  0.107  0.295  0.235 (0.04)  (0.04)  (-0.59)  (-0.32)  (1.12)  (1.04)  (-0.14)  (-0.16)  (0.17)  (0.25)  (0.22)  (0.18)
> MATERIAL  0.193  0.193  0.783  **  0.951  **  -2.395  **  -2.647  **  0.076  0.076  0.612  **  0.665  **  -1.802  * -1.857  ** (1.10)  (1.10)  (2.06)  (2.39)  (-2.17)  (-2.43)  (0.50)  (0.50)  (2.04)  (2.17)  (-1.93)  (-2.00)
> SIZE  0.211  ***  0.211  ***  0.097  0.167  -0.261  -0.426  0.178  ***  0.175  ***  0.106  0.139  -0.233  -0.333 (2.94)  (2.94)  (0.61)  (1.00)  (-0.55)  (-0.91)  (2.84)  (2.81)  (0.86)  (1.11)  (-0.60)  (-0.87) (Continues) 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

90 HE ET AL .

> TA B L E 5  (Continued)
> Panel A: All restatements ALL RESTATEMENTS
> CLASSACTION 365  DISMISS 365  SETTLE 365  CLASSACTION 730  DISMISS 730  SETTLE 730
> Dependent variable  (1A)  (1B)  (2A)  (2B)  (3A)  (3B)  (4A)  (4B)  (5A)  (5B)  (6A)  (6B)
> CAR( -120,  -2)  -0.674  **  -0.674  **  1.615  **  1.974  ***  -3.884  * -4.284  **  -0.473  -0.478  0.984  **  1.084  **  -2.890  * -3.090  *(-2.00)  (-2.00)  (2.33)  (2.72)  (-1.95)  (-2.18)  (-1.59)  (-1.61)  (1.96)  (2.13)  (-1.80)  (-1.94)
> CAR( -1,  +1)  -7.773  ***  -7.773  ***  4.738  ***  4.976  ***  -12.619  **  -12.487  **  -6.428  ***  -6.448  ***  2.885  **  2.971  **  -9.089  **  -9.051  ** (-7.28)  (-7.28)  (2.60)  (2.70)  (-2.49)  (-2.50)  (-6.69)  (-6.70)  (2.06)  (2.08)  (-2.04)  (-2.05)
> LITRISK KS_CCMT  0.746  ***  0.746  ***  0.045  -0.029  0.245  0.426  0.853  ***  0.854  ***  -0.163  -0.194  0.724  0.802 (4.90)  (4.90)  (0.13)  (-0.08)  (0.24)  (0.43)  (6.30)  (6.30)  (-0.64)  (-0.74)  (0.90)  (1.00)
> Pleading Standard  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
> Year fixed effects  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
> Industry fixed effects  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
> p-value: TIMELY  = NONTIMELY  0.95  0.00  ***  0.00  ***  0.47  0.02  **  0.02  **
> N 1,992  1,992  224  224  224  224  1,992  1,992  310  310  310  310 Pseudo  R2 (Adj  R2 ) 0.249  0.249  0.245  0.279  0.152  0.181  0.223  0.223  0.165  0.183  0.087  0.104
> Panel B: Adverse restatements ADVERSE RESTATEMENTS
> CLASSACTION 365  DISMISS 365  SETTLE 365  CLASSACTION 730  DISMISS 730  SETTLE 730
> Dependent variable  (1A)  (1B)  (2A)  (2B)  (3A)  (3B)  (4A)  (4B)  (5A)  (5B)  (6A)  (6B)
> JOINTMWREST  0.762 ***  -0.339  1.111  0.439 **  -0.532  1.536 (3.62)  (-0.68)  (0.78)  (2.39)  (-1.36)  (1.29)
> TIMELY  0.900 **  1.926 **  -4.549 * 0.300  1.452 * -3.952 *
> (2.55)  (1.99)  (-1.83)  (0.92)  (1.71)  (-1.79)
> NONTIMELY  0.735 ***  -0.477  1.721  0.467 **  -0.656 * 2.074 *
> (3.36)  (-0.93)  (1.21)  (2.45)  (-1.65)  (1.75)
> MAG  -4.344  ***  -4.381  ***  6.790  * 6.873  * -16.790  * -15.744  * -5.246  ***  -5.211  ***  4.683  * 4.684  -16.568  **  -15.708  *(-2.73)  (-2.75)  (1.77)  (1.73)  (-1.84)  (-1.76)  (-3.54)  (-3.51)  (1.65)  (1.60)  (-1.99)  (-1.91) (Continues) 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

HE ET AL . 91 

> TA B L E 5  (Continued)
> Panel B: Adverse restatements ADVERSE RESTATEMENTS
> CLASSACTION 365  DISMISS 365  SETTLE 365  CLASSACTION 730  DISMISS 730  SETTLE 730
> Dependent variable  (1A)  (1B)  (2A)  (2B)  (3A)  (3B)  (4A)  (4B)  (5A)  (5B)  (6A)  (6B)
> FRAUD  0.067  0.080  0.299  0.352  -1.855  -2.197  0.226  0.211  0.366  0.502  -1.550  -2.026 (0.13)  (0.16)  (0.35)  (0.41)  (-0.68)  (-0.82)  (0.49)  (0.45)  (0.49)  (0.66)  (-0.64)  (-0.85)
> PERSIST  0.110  **  0.112  **  -0.032  -0.032  0.059  0.046  0.095  **  0.093  **  -0.097  -0.092  0.298  0.267 (2.49)  (2.52)  (-0.32)  (-0.32)  (0.19)  (0.15)  (2.44)  (2.40)  (-1.20)  (-1.10)  (1.14)  (1.03)
> PERVASIVE  0.124  0.126  -0.255  -0.277  0.675  0.677  0.097  0.096  -0.147  -0.187  0.435  0.520 (1.00)  (1.01)  (-1.03)  (-1.09)  (0.89)  (0.91)  (0.85)  (0.84)  (-0.72)  (-0.89)  (0.65)  (0.79)
> REVENUE  0.343  0.344  -0.221  -0.231  0.600  0.633  0.127  0.126  -0.390  -0.419  1.157  1.175 (1.40)  (1.40)  (-0.45)  (-0.45)  (0.39)  (0.42)  (0.57)  (0.56)  (-0.95)  (-0.99)  (0.87)  (0.90)
> SEC  0.027  0.031  -0.227  -0.050  1.685  1.436  -0.005  -0.009  0.246  0.336  -0.226  -0.355 (0.10)  (0.11)  (-0.42)  (-0.09)  (0.98)  (0.85)  (-0.02)  (-0.04)  (0.54)  (0.71)  (-0.15)  (-0.24)
> MATERIAL  0.202  0.204  0.723  * 0.875  **  -2.289  * -2.468  **  0.061  0.059  0.433  0.526  -1.344  -1.402 (1.07)  (1.08)  (1.81)  (2.10)  (-1.93)  (-2.12)  (0.37)  (0.36)  (1.35)  (1.59)  (-1.33)  (-1.41)
> SIZE  0.233  ***  0.236  ***  0.033  0.106  -0.080  -0.281  0.216  ***  0.214  ***  0.023  0.059  -0.005  -0.118 (3.01)  (3.03)  (0.19)  (0.60)  (-0.16)  (-0.55)  (3.16)  (3.12)  (0.17)  (0.43)  (-0.01)  (-0.28)
> CAR( -120,  -2)  -0.874  **  -0.871  **  1.673  **  2.026  ***  -4.145  * -4.487  **  -0.648  **  -0.652  **  1.217  **  1.369  **  -3.544  **  -3.864  ** (-2.43)  (-2.42)  (2.35)  (2.70)  (-1.97)  (-2.18)  (-2.02)  (-2.03)  (2.20)  (2.42)  (-2.02)  (-2.23)
> CAR( -1,  +1)  -8.334  ***  -8.328  ***  4.388  **  4.590  **  -11.629  **  -11.280  **  -7.056  ***  -7.075  ***  3.261  **  3.596  **  -9.846  **  -10.470  ** (-7.25)  (-7.24)  (2.38)  (2.44)  (-2.20)  (-2.17)  (-6.77)  (-6.79)  (2.20)  (2.37)  (-2.06)  (-2.23)
> LITRISK KS_CCMT  0.738  ***  0.737  ***  0.072  -0.010  0.205  0.462  0.785  ***  0.786  ***  -0.137  -0.189  0.688  0.831 (4.51)  (4.50)  (0.20)  (-0.03)  (0.18)  (0.42)  (5.38)  (5.39)  (-0.49)  (-0.65)  (0.77)  (0.94)
> Pleading Standard  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
> Year fixed effects  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
> Industry fixed effects  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes (Continues) 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

92 HE ET AL .

> TA B L E 5  (Continued)
> Panel B: Adverse restatements ADVERSE RESTATEMENTS
> CLASSACTION 365  DISMISS 365  SETTLE 365  CLASSACTION 730  DISMISS 730  SETTLE 730
> Dependent variable  (1A)  (1B)  (2A)  (2B)  (3A)  (3B)  (4A)  (4B)  (5A)  (5B)  (6A)  (6B)
> p-value: TIMELY  = NONTIMELY  0.63  0.00  ***  0.00  ***  0.61  0.00 ***  0.00  ***
> N 1,679  1,679  201  201  201  201  1,679  1,679  272  272  272  272 Pseudo  R2 (Adj  R2 ) 0.258  0.258  0.246  0.284  0.144  0.178  0.227  0.227  0.176  0.203  0.118  0.089
> Notes : Panel A reports the regression results of estimating the effect of joint MW/restatement, timely MW, and non-timely MW disclosures on the likelihood of class action lawsuits (Columns 1A and 1B; 4A and 4B), dismissal of class action lawsuits (Columns 2A and 2B; 5A and 5B), and settlement amounts (Columns 3A and 3B; 6A and 6B). Panel A (Panel B) reports the results for all (adverse) restatements. The sample groups consist of restating firms that disclose an MW concurrent with, before, or after the restatement (joint MW/restatement reporters); restating firms that disclose an MW prior to the restatement (timely reporters), restating firms that disclose an MW concurrent with, or following the restatement (non-timely reporters), and restating firms that do not report MWs at all (non-MW reporters).  CLASSACTION  365  (730 ) is an indicator variable set to one if a class action lawsuit was filed against the firm within 365 (730) days from the restatement announcement date, and to zero otherwise.  DISMISS  is an indicator variable set to one if the class action lawsuit is dismissed, and to zero otherwise.  SETTLE  is the natural logarithm of the amount of settlement from the class action against the restating firm.  JOINTMWREST  is an indicator variable set to one for restatements that are associated with an MW disclosure, and to zero otherwise.  TIMELY  is an indicator variable set to one if the firm discloses an MW prior to the restatement, and to zero otherwise.  NONTIMELY  is an indicator variable set to one if the firm discloses an MW concurrent with, or following the restatement, and to zero otherwise.  MAG  is the cumulative change in net income for the restated periods divided by the total assets at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement.  FRAUD  is an indicator variable set to one if the restatement involves fraud, and to zero otherwise.  PERSIST  is the number of years restated.
> PERVASIVE  is the number of account groups affected by the restatement.  REVENUE  is an indicator variable set to one if the restatement involves revenue-recognition misstatements, and to zero otherwise.  SEC  is an indicator variable set to one if the restatement involves an SEC investigation, and to zero otherwise.  MATERIAL  is an indicator variable set to one if the restatement is announced in non-routine disclosures, such as 8-Ks or press releases, and to zero if the restatement is filed in periodic filings, such as 10-K and 10-Q.  SIZE  is the natural logarithm of total assets at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement.  CAR( -120,  -2)  is the size-adjusted cumulative abnormal returns over ( -120,  -2) days relative to the restatement announcement date.  CAR( -1,  +1)  is the size-adjusted cumulative abnormal returns over the three-day window around the restatement announcement date.  LITRISK  KS_CCMT  is the predicted value of firm-specific litigation risk based on Kim and Skinner 's (2012) litigation model (Model 2 in Table 7) estimated separately for each pleading standard applied by federal circuits (i)  PSLRA  and  PSLRA_STRINGENT ,(ii)  INTERMEDIATE , and (iii)  SGI , following Cazier et al. (2016).  z-Statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

HE ET AL . 93 

## 5.3 Additional analyses 5.3.1 Propensity score matching 

A potential research design issue that may affect our inferences is that joint reporters may be systematically different from non-MW reporters (and analogously, that similar differences may exist across timely and non-timely reporters) in some economic factor that might influence the variation in the adverse consequences of restatements that we observe across the groups. To alleviate these concerns, we employ a propensity score matching (PSM) procedure to obtain a control sample of non-MW reporters (non-timely reporters) that are similar to the treatment group of joint reporters (timely reporters) across both restatement and firm characteristics. Specifically, we estimate a logit model of the propensity of disclosing an MW (i) jointly with the restatement ( JOINTMWREST ), or (ii) in a timely manner ( TIMELY )given the observable restatement and firm characteristics. After fitting the model, we match, without replacement, each joint reporter (timely reporter) to a non-MW reporter (non-timely reporter), along all predictors of the propen-sity score. We use the following logistic regression model to estimate the firm 's probability to disclose: (i) an MW disclosure jointly with the restatement; and (ii) an MW in a timely manner. 

Reporting _Decision = ?? + ?? 1MAG + ?? 2FRAUD + ?? 3PERSIST + ?? 4PERVASIVE + ?? 5REVENUE + ?? 6SEC 

+ ?? 7MATERIAL + ?? 8SIZE + ?? 9LEVERAGE + ?? 10 BM + ?? 11 EXT _FINANCE + ?? 12 LOSS 

+ ?? 13 MGTCHANGE + ?? 14 LIT IND + ?? 15 BIG 4 + ?? 16 AUD _FEE + ?? 17 NONAUD _FEE 

+ ?? 18 CLIENT _IMP + ?? 19 AUDCHANGE + ?? (4) 

Reporting_Decision is an indicator set to one if the firm is a joint reporter (timely reporter), and zero if it is a non-MW reporter (non-timely reporter). In addition to the restatement and firm characteristics that we control for in Equa-tions (1–3), we also include firm and auditor characteristics that affect firm 's MW disclosure. Prior research documents that the MW disclosure is positively associated with financial distress, recent management changes, industry litigation risk, and auditor quality proxies (e.g., the presence of a Big 4, audit effort, and auditor change) but negatively asso-ciated with external finance needs (Ashbaugh-Skaife, Collins, & Kinney, 2007; Rice & Weber, 2012). Accordingly, we control for total debt and equity financing in the following fiscal year ( EXT_FINANCE ); financial performance ( LOSS , an indicator set to one if the firm reports a negative income before extraordinary items at the end of the fiscal year pre-ceding the restatement announcement, and to zero otherwise); change of top executives ( MGTCHANGE , set to one if the firm changes its CEO or CFO in the year before or after the restatement announcement, and to zero otherwise); industry litigation risk ( LIT IND , set to one if the firm is in a high litigation risk industry and to zero otherwise); an indi-cator for the presence of a Big 4 auditor ( BIG4 ); audit fees ( AUD_FEE , measured at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement announcement); non-audit fees ( NONAUD_FEE , measured at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement announcement); client importance ( CLIENT_IMP , firm 's total fee paid to auditor divided by the local office 'stotal revenue measured at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement announcement); and auditor change (AUDCHANGE , set to one if the firm changes its auditor in the year before or after the restatement announcement, and to zero otherwise). Table 6 reports the estimation results of the matching model for the joint reporting (Columns 1 and 2) and timely reporting (Columns 3 and 4). Since our sample sizes drop as we increase the number of controls in the model, we report the results under different specifications: matching along (i) restatement characteristics (Columns 1 and 3), and then (ii) restatement, firm, and audit characteristics (Columns 2 and 4). In Column 2, our results indicate that joint disclo-sures are likely if the restatement is fraud-related, more persistent, more pervasive, disclosed in non-routine filings, and has a larger adverse income effect. The probability of a joint MW/restatement is also higher for firms with recent management and auditor changes and for those paying higher audit fees, while lower for larger firms, firms with high leverage and external capital needs. In Column 4, timely MW reporting is more likely for highly leveraged firms, firms with recent management change, auditor change, and higher audit effort, but less likely for larger firms, firms that are 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 94 HE ET AL .

TA B L E 6 Determinants of firm 's MW reporting decision 

JOINTMWREST TIMELY 

(1) (2) (3) (4) Dependent variable Restatement characteristics Restatement, firm, and auditor characteristics Restatement characteristics Restatement, firm, and auditor characteristics 

MAG -3.534 *** -3.597 ** 0.553 0.164 (-3.81) (-2.42) (0.34) (0.07) 

FRAUD 1.080 *** 1.078 ** -0.390 -0.908 (3.13) (2.32) (-0.70) (-1.09) 

PERSIST 0.058 ** 0.080 *** -0.144 *** -0.075 (2.49) (2.63) (-2.82) (-1.16) 

PERVASIVE 0.374 *** 0.423 *** -0.155 -0.084 (5.40) (4.71) (-1.23) (-0.55) 

REVENUE 0.056 0.036 -0.170 -0.083 (0.44) (0.22) (-0.72) (-0.28) 

SEC -0.360 ** -0.605 *** -0.824 ** -0.663 (-2.43) (-3.06) (-2.24) (-1.35) 

MATERIAL 1.460 *** 1.558 *** -0.323 -0.433 (11.87) (9.91) (-1.33) (-1.40) 

SIZE -0.086 ** -0.146 *(-2.29) (-1.77) 

LEVERAGE -0.523 * 1.085 *(-1.68) (1.80) 

BM 0.060 0.156 (0.68) (0.70) 

EXT_FINANCE -0.568 * -1.042 (-1.86) (-1.60) 

LOSS -0.009 0.325 (-0.06) (1.40) 

MGTCHANGE 0.553 *** 0.573 ** (3.73) (2.41) 

LIT IND 0.155 -0.565 *(1.11) (-1.91) 

BIG4 -0.246 -0.534 *(-1.44) (-1.81) 

AUD_FEE 0.017 *** 0.006 *** (8.47) (2.98) 

NONAUD_FEE -0.009 *** 0.006 (-2.73) (1.04) 

CLIENT_IMP -0.368 -0.059 (-0.87) (-0.08) 

AUDCHANGE 0.483 *** 0.437 *(3.52) (1.89) (Continues) 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License HE ET AL . 95 

TA B L E 6 (Continued) 

JOINTMWREST TIMELY 

(1) (2) (3) (4) Dependent variable Restatement characteristics Restatement, firm, and auditor characteristics Restatement characteristics Restatement, firm, and auditor characteristics 

N 2,441 1,697 903 619 Pseudo R2 0.090 0.180 0.032 0.113 

Notes : The table reports the logistic regression results of estimating: (1) restating firm 's propensity to make an MW disclo-sure concurrent with, before, or after the restatement announcement (Columns 1 and 2), and (2) restating firm 's propensity to report an MW in a timely manner (Columns 3 and 4). JOINTMWREST is an indicator variable set to one for restatements that are associated with an MW disclosure, and to zero otherwise. TIMELY is an indicator variable set to one if the firm discloses an MW prior to the restatement, and to zero otherwise. NONTIMELY is an indicator variable set to one if the firm discloses an MW con-current with, or following the restatement, and to zero otherwise. MAG is the cumulative change in net income for the restated periods divided by the total assets at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement. FRAUD is an indicator variable set to one if the restatement involves fraud, and to zero otherwise. PERSIST is the number of years restated. PERVASIVE is the num-ber of account groups affected by the restatement. REVENUE is an indicator variable set to one if the restatement involves revenue-recognition misstatements, and to zero otherwise. SEC is an indicator variable set to one if the restatement involves an SEC investigation, and to zero otherwise. MATERIAL is an indicator variable set to one if the restatement is announced in non-routine disclosures, such as 8-Ks or press releases, and to zero if the restatement is filed in periodic filings, such as 10-K and 10-Q. SIZE is the natural logarithm of total assets at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement. LEVERAGE is the total long-term debt divided by total assets at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement. BM is the book to market ratio, measured as the ratio of firm 's equity to market value. EXT_FINANCE is total debt and equity financing in the fiscal year after restatement scaled by firm 's total assets, where equity financing is measured as SSTK (sale of common and preferred stock) minus PRSTKC (purchase of common and preferred stock) minus DV (cash dividends) and debt financing is measured as DLTIS (long-term debt issuance) minus DLTR (long-term debt reduction) minus DLCCH (current debt changes). LOSS is an indicator variable set to one if the client incurs a loss in the current year, and to zero otherwise. MGTCHANGE is an indicator variable set to one if the firm changes its CEO or CFO in the year before or after the restatement, and to zero otherwise. LIT IND 

is an indicator variable set to one if the firm operates in an industry with any of the following SIC codes: 2833–2836, 3570– 3577, 3600–3674, 5200–5961, 7370–7374, and 8731–8734, and to zero otherwise. BIG4 is an indicator variable set to one if the firm is audited by a Big 4 auditor, and to zero otherwise. AUD_FEE is total audit fees scaled by total assets measured at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement. NONAUD_FEE is total non-audit fees scaled by total assets measured at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement. CLIENT_IMP is firm 's total fees paid to auditor divided by the local office 'stotal revenue (audit fees + non-audit fees) measured at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement. AUDCHANGE is 

an indicator variable set to one if the firm had an auditor change in the year before or after restatement, and to zero otherwise. 

z-Statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. more prone to litigation, and clients of Big 4 auditors. Under that specification, we do not find any of the restatement characteristics to be associated with the likelihood of timely MW reporting. 16 We then construct our treated and control groups by matching, without replacement, each joint reporter (timely reporter) to a non-MW reporter (non-timely reporter) that has the closest predicted probability to disclose an MW jointly (timely), using a caliper of 5%. We then assess the consequences of restatement announcements across the treated and control groups. Table 7 displays the results of the propensity-score-matched sample tests. When matching on restatement, firm, and auditor characteristics, our evidence in Panels A and B indicates that investors react more negatively to restatements that are accompanied with an MW disclosure, compared to a stand-alone restatement, consistent with our baseline results in Table 3. In analyzing the stock price reaction to restatements contingent on the timeliness of MW reporting, our results in Panel A (where we match based on restatement characteristics alone) reveal 16 Bergstresser and Philippon (2006) report that top executive 's equity-based compensation affects firm 's likelihood of having financial irregularities. In addi-tional analysis, we therefore also control for executives’ equity-based compensation as a potential determinant of managers’ MW reporting, by including both        

> DELTA (the dollar change in the total value of CEO 's equity incentives with a one percent change in the firm 's stock price) and VEGA (the dollar change in the total value of CEO 's equity incentives with a one percent change in the standard deviation of firm 's stock return) in the matching model. Untabulated results reveal that DELTA and VEGA are not significantly associated with the MW reporting decision. We also do not find perceptible differences across the samples in any of the market reaction tests. The insignificant results are likely attributable to the significant sample attrition (ranging from 65 to 70%) which engenders low testing power. 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

96 HE ET AL .

> TA B L E 7  Propensity score tests of the effect of joint MW/Restatement, timely MW and non-timely MW disclosures on the market reaction
> Panel A: Matching on restatement characteristics ALL RESTATEMENTS  ADVERSE RESTATEMENTS (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)
> JOINTMWREST  JOINTMWREST N Yes  No  N TIMELY  NONTIMELY  N Yes  No  N TIMELY  NONTIMELY
> CAR( -1, 1)  836  -0.0279  0.0092  ***  167  -0.0370  -0.0146  **  737  -0.0323  -0.0126  ***  140  -0.0488  -0.0167  ***
> CAR( -2,  +2)  836  -0.0306  -0.0040  ***  167  -0.0345  -0.0200  * 737  -0.0359  -0.0059  ***  140  -0.0455  -0.0221  **
> Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  )30day  416  0.0207  -0.0105  ***  79  0.0096  -0.0041  347  0.0259  -0.0107  ***  66  0.0147  -0.0007
> Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  )91day  416  0.0192  0.0026  **  79  0.0190  0.0022  347  0.0223  0.0032  **  66  0.0201  0.0063
> Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  )152day  416  0.0160  0.0055  79  0.0137  0.0037  347  0.0180  0.0058  * 66  0.0128  0.0066
> CLASSACTION 365  592  0.1402  0.0997  **  136  0.1250  0.1250  471  0.1741  0.1062  ***  99  0.1818  0.1616
> Panel B: Matching on restatement, firm, and auditor characteristics ALL RESTATEMENTS  ADVERSE RESTATEMENTS (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)
> JOINTMWREST  JOINTMWREST N Yes  No  N TIMELY  NONTIMELY  N Yes  No  N TIMELY  NONTIMELY
> CAR( -1,  +1)  608  -0.0236  0.0044  ***  109  -0.0288  -0.0250  491  -0.0277  0.0034  ***  84  -0.0382  -0.0294
> CAR( -2,  +2)  608  -0.0250  0.0017  ***  109  -0.0275  -0.0232  491  -0.0291  0.0018  ***  84  -0.0367  -0.0284
> Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  )30day  309  0.0214  -0.0012  ***  56  0.0080  -0.0072  253  0.0252  -0.0180  ***  44  0.0120  0.0111
> Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  )91day  309  0.0193  -0.0002  **  56  0.0276  0.0077  253  0.0209  -0.0035  **  44  0.0204  0.0274
> Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  )152day  309  0.0173  0.0034  * 56  0.0123  0.0170  253  0.0179  0.0030  * 44  0.0054  0.0116
> CLASSACTION 365  401  0.1446  0.0998  * 99  0.0606  0.1919  322  0.1521  0.0900  **  78  0.1026  0.1410
> Notes : The table compares the stock price reaction, option price reaction, and class action lawsuits across the sample groups using the propensity-score matching procedure. Joint MW/restatement (timely MW) reporters are matched to non-MW (non-timely MW) reporters using a caliper of 5%.  CAR( -1,  +1)  and  CAR( -2,  +2)  are the size-adjusted cumulative abnormal returns over the three- and five-day window around the restatement announcement date, respectively.  Ln( ?? rest  /?? pre  ) measures the effect of restatement on market uncertainty using different standard option durations (30 day, 91 day, and 152 day), where  ?? rest  is the stock option 's average implied volatility of three days [ -1,  +1] surrounding restatement and  ?? pre  is the average implied volatility of days [ -10,  -2] relative to the restatement announcement date.  CLASSACTION  365  is an indicator variable set to one if a class action lawsuit was filed against the firm within 365 days from the restatement announcement date, and to zero otherwise.  JOINTMWREST  is an indicator variable set to one for restatements that are associated with an MW disclosure, and to zero otherwise.  TIMELY  is an indicator variable set to one if the firm discloses an MW prior to the restatement, and to zero otherwise.  NONTIMELY  is an indicator variable set to one if the firm discloses an MW concurrent with, or following the restatement, and to zero otherwise. ***, **, and * indicate significance level at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

HE ET AL . 97 

F I G U R E 2 Cumulative abnormal returns 

Notes : This figure plots the cumulative abnormal return (CAR) over the ( -180, +180) window relative to the restatement announcement date for the non-MW reporters, timely MW reporters, and non-timely MW reporters. The CAR is calculated using size-adjusted abnormal returns. that investors react more negatively to restatements that were preceded by a timely MW, relative to restatements that are not forewarned, again consistent with our primary results. In Panel B, we also include both firm and auditor charac-teristics in our matching variables. Although our stock price evidence still indicates that timely reporters suffer larger negative price reaction than non-timely reporters, the difference is not significant, potentially due to the resulting sam-ple attrition arising from matching along multiple firm and restatement dimensions. Taken together, our evidence still implies that investors perceive joint MW/restatement (timely MW) disclosures to have more adverse consequences, compared with non-MW (non-timely MW) disclosures. 

5.3.2 Long-term price effects 

To shed further light on the evidence from our H1A and H1B, we assess the long-term stock price performance for the timely, non-timely, and non-MW reporters. If our argument that joint MW/restatement disclosures communicate pervasive problems that will likely lead to permanent impairment in financial reporting quality, then we would expect investors’ negative reactions to persist in future periods following the restatement. In Figure 2, we find that joint MW reporters—both timely and non-timely—experience significantly more negative market returns at the time of, and following the restatement announcement, relative to non-MW reporters, consistent with our expectation that MW-associated restatements have more widespread adverse effects on reporting quality. Further, timely MW reporters continue to experience more negative long-term price effects compared to non-timely reporters. These results pro-vide evidence that the negative effects observed in Table 3 are not a manifestation of investor over-reaction to the news; rather, they reflect the more deteriorating reporting quality experienced by the timely reporters. 

5.3.3 Implications for future earnings quality 

To provide further evidence that joint disclosures are associated with lower financial reporting quality that might extend into future periods, we compare earnings quality in the first and second years following restatements for joint and non-MW reporters. We use both the likelihood of subsequent (second-time or later ) restatements and accruals 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 98 HE ET AL .

quality to examine the cross-section variation in earnings quality. Table 8, Columns 1 and 2, presents the estimates from the logistic regression of the restatement likelihood ( SUBSEQ_REST ) on JOINTMWREST after controlling for firm and auditor characteristics. 17 The analysis reveals that firms with joint MW and restatement disclosures are sig-nificantly more likely to have a subsequent restatement within the first year (Column 1) and/or the second year (Column 2) following their first restatements, compared to non-MW reporters. Consistent with the results in H1A, this observation implies that joint disclosures signal more permanent financial reporting issues that are yet to be identified. We then examine the effect of joint MW/restatement disclosures on accruals quality in the subsequent two years fol-lowing the restatement. To measure accrual quality, we estimate the following regression model developed by Dechow and Dichev (2002) and extended by Francis, LaFond, Olsson, and Schipper (2005): 

?WC = ?? + B1CFO (t - 1) + B2CFO (t) + B3CFO (t + 1) + B4?REV (t) + B5PPE (t) + ?? (5) The model measures the extent to which current accruals ( WC ) do not map into past, present, or future cash flows (CFO ). Following Francis et al. (2005), we estimate the model cross-sectionally by year within each of the 48 industry classifications (Fama & French, 1997). We use the absolute value of the residual from the previous model to measure accrual quality, where a higher residual value indicates lower accruals quality. 18 Then, we regress the accruals quality measure on JOINTMWREST , after including controls that affect accruals quality following prior research (e.g., Gray, Koh, & Tong, 2009; Lobo, Song, & Stanford, 2012). 19 Our results, reported in Table 8, Columns 3 and 4, reveal that joint MW/restatement reporters have significantly lower accruals quality in the first year following the restatement; however, we do not find evidence of lower accruals quality in the second year following the restatement. 20 Collectively, these results reinforce our earlier conjecture that joint MW/restatement reporters are more likely to experience adverse reporting quality issues that persist into future periods. 

5.3.4 Analyst forecasts revisions 

To further improve our causal inferences, we finally examine financial analysts’ forecast revisions in response to restatements conditional on firm 's MW reporting. As analysts’ primary roles involve providing and interpreting new information to the market (Livnat & Zhang, 2012), we expect their reaction to MW-associated restatements to be dif-ferent from restatements by non-MW reporters if these two types of restatements signal different impact on finan-cial reporting quality. To examine this relation, we compare the magnitude of the consensus forecast EPS revisions in the two years following the restatement ( FORECAST_REVISION t+1 and FORECAST_REVISION t+2) across the different restatement groups. In Column (1) of Table 9, Panel A, we report the percentage change of the consensus forecast from the month preceding the restatement to the month after the restatement for the joint and non-MW reporters. The results indicate that analysts revise their one- and two-year ahead forecasts down for both types of restatements; how-ever, the average revision magnitude for the joint reporters is significantly higher compared to the non-MW reporters, and the difference is even stronger using the PSM sample in Column (1) of Panel B. These results suggest that ana-lysts interpret the joint disclosure as more of an adverse signal of financial reporting quality compared to stand-alone restatements. Additionally, in Column (2) of Panels A and B, we find that analysts also revise down their forecasts for 17 We control for the following variables that associate with the likelihood of restatements following prior research (e.g., Chin & Chi, 2009): firm size ( SIZE ), return on assets ( ROA ), book-to-market ratio ( BM ), leverage ( LEVERAGE ), total number of business and geographical segments ( SEGMENTS ), firm age ( FIR-MAGE ), auditor change ( AUDCHANGE ), and loss ( LOSS ). 18 Since the residuals (the dependent variable) are inversely related to accruals quality, the signs of the coefficients in Table 8 (Columns 3 and 4) have been reversed so that the signs reflect the direction of the effects of the test and control variables on accruals quality .19 Specifically, we control for the following variables: firm size ( SIZE ) using the natural logarithm of total assets, the presence of a Big 4 auditor ( BIG4 ), volatility of cash flows from operations over the sample years ending in year t (CFO_VOLAT ), volatility of sales over the sample years ending in year t (SALES_VOLAT ), ratio of the number of years of losses relative to the number of sample years ending in year t (%NEG_EA ), and operating cycle ( OP_CYCLE ), measured as the natural logarithm of [360/(sales/average accounts receivables)] + [360/(cost of goods sold/average inventory)]. 20 In line with this evidence, Wilson (2008) finds that earnings response coefficients for restating firms are lower up to a period of four quarters following the restatement. Wiedman and Hendricks (2013) also find that that firms improve their financial reporting credibility following a restatement by reporting higher accruals quality. 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License HE ET AL . 99 

TA B L E 8 Effect on future earnings quality 

SUBSEQ_REST ACCRUALS_QUALITY t + 1 t + 2 t + 1 t + 2Dependent variable (1) (2) (3) (4) 

JOINTMWREST 0.275 ** 0.340 ** -0.014 *** -0.004 (2.08) (2.47) (2.68) (0.65) 

SIZE 0.078 ** -0.008 0.009 *** 0.006 *** (2.10) (-0.20) (-5.36) (-3.15) 

BIG4 -0.172 0.341 ** 0.006 0.019 *** (-1.08) (2.04) (-0.97) (-2.84) 

LOSS 0.289 ** -0.042 (2.10) (-1.41) 

ROA 0.041 0.310 ** (0.31) (2.25) 

BM -0.099 0.009 (-1.49) (0.20) 

LEVERAGE 0.642 ** 0.005 (2.28) (0.01) 

SEGMENTS 0.169 ** 0.027 (2.04) (0.31) 

FIRMAGE -0.001 -0.042 (-0.01) (-0.32) 

AUDCHANGE 0.670 *** 1.011 *** (3.90) (5.58) 

CFO_VOLAT -0.116 *** -0.325 *** (3.57) (9.32) 

SALES_VOLAT -0.007 -0.008 *(1.54) (1.72) 

%NEG_EA -0.024 *** -0.006 (2.88) (0.64) 

OP_CYCLE -0.001 -0.002 (0.32) (0.62) 

Year fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes 

Industry fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes 

N 2,534 2,148 1,198 1,024 

N (SUBSEQ_REST = 1) 348 326 Pseudo R2 (Adj. R2 ) 0.048 0.052 0.126 0.205 

Notes : The table reports the regression results of estimating the effect of joint MW/restatement disclosures on the likelihood of subsequent restatements (Columns 1 and 2) and accruals quality (Columns 3 and 4). The sample groups consist of restating firms that disclose an MW concurrent with, before, or after the restatement (joint MW/restatement reporters) and restating firms that do not report MWs at all (non-MW reporters). SUBSEQ_REST is an indicator set to one if the firm issues a subsequent restatement, and to zero otherwise. ACCRUALS_QUALITY is the firm 's accrual quality measured by the accrual estimation errors developed in Dechow and Dichev (2002) and extended in McNichols (2002) and Francis et al. (2005), according to the following model: 

?WC = B0 + B1CFO (t - 1) + B2CFO (t) + B3CFO (t + 1) + B4?REV (t) + B5PPE (t) + ?? .

JOINTMWREST is an indicator variable set to one for restatements that are associated with an MW disclosure, and to zero (Continues) 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 100 HE ET AL .

TA B L E 8 (Continued) otherwise. SIZE is the natural logarithm of total assets at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement. BIG4 is an indicator variable set to one if the firm is audited by a Big 4 auditor, and to zero otherwise. LOSS is an indicator variable set to one if the client incurs a loss in the current year, and to zero otherwise. ROA is the return on assets, measured as income before extraordinary items divided by total assets. BM is the book to market ratio, measured as the ratio of firm 'sequity to market value. LEVERAGE is the total long-term debt divided by total assets at the end of the fiscal year preceding the restatement. SEGMENTS is the total number of business and geographical segments. FIRMAGE is the natural logarithm of the number of years the firm has been listed on Compustat. AUDCHANGE is an indicator variable that is set to one if the firm had an auditor change in the year before or after restatement, and to zero otherwise. CFO_VOLAT is the volatility of cash flows from operations over the sample years ending in year t. SALES_VOLAT is the volatility of sales over the sample years ending in year t. %NEG_EA is the ratio of number of years of losses relative to the number of sample years ending in year t. OP_CYCLE 

is the firm 's operating cycle, measured as the natural logarithm of [360/(sales/average accounts receivables)] + [360/(cost of goods sold/average inventory)]. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. 

TA B L E 9 Analyst forecasts revisions 

Panel A: All adverse restatements (1) (2) 

JOINTMWREST 

Yes No Diff. TIMELY NONTIMELY Diff. 

FORECAST_REVISION t+1 -0.047 -0.021 -0.026 ** -0.044 -0.047 0.003 

FORECAST_REVISION t+2 -0.046 -0.026 -0.020 * -0.055 -0.043 -0.012 

N 448 808 94 354 

Panel B: Propensity score matched restatements (1) (2) 

JOINTMWREST 

Yes No Diff. TIMELY NONTIMELY Diff. 

FORECAST_REVISION t+1 -0.059 0.001 -0.060 *** -0.052 -0.068 0.016 

FORECAST_REVISION t+2 -0.065 -0.009 -0.056 *** -0.058 0.014 -0.072 

N 182 182 69 69 

Notes : The table reports the percentage change of the consensus analyst forecast from the month preceding the restatement to the month after the restatement. FORECAST_REVISION t+1 and FORECAST_REVISION t+2 are the consensus forecast revisions of each of the next two years’ earnings per share respectively. We report the analysts’ revisions for both the one-year and two-year ahead EPS forecasts and conduct a univariate t-test between joint MW/restatement reporters (timely reporters) and non-MW reporters (non-timely reporters). ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. both timely and non-timely reporters but we do not detect any significant difference in the revision magnitudes across these firms. In conclusion, analysts’ response to restatements provides additional non-market evidence to corroborate our previous results. 

## 6 CONCLUSION 

We attempt to understand the role of ICFR disclosures in evaluating the value-relevance of financial restatements. Fol-lowing PCAOB 's (2004) arguments, restatements should ideally be preceded by MW disclosures (timely MW report-ing); however, in our sample, we identify firms that report the MW only after the restatement (non-timely reporters), and other restating firms who do not report the MW at all (non-MW reporters). We exploit this variation in MW report-ing to understand how investors incorporate ICFR disclosures in assessing the implications of restatements across these firms. 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License HE ET AL . 101 

We first examine differences in stock price, option volatility, and litigation reactions to restatements that are associ-ated with an MW disclosure contrasted with restatements that are not associated with any MW disclosure. Comparing the joint and non-MW reporters, our analyses reveal that firms that announce a restatement and an accompanying MW experience significantly more negative market returns, greater implied volatility, and higher likelihood of class-action lawsuits, compared to non-MW reporters. These results generally imply that investors perceive joint disclosures to reflect more adverse effects, compared to a single restatement disclosure. Second, since the market appears to evaluate a joint disclosure more adversely, we next examine whether the reac-tion to MW-associated restatements varies with the timeliness of the related MW disclosure. The importance of this test lies in the fact that earlier MW disclosures should warn the market of potential misstatements, and therefore, the price reaction might be muted to a restatement that was announced subsequently. Alternatively, a timely MW disclo-sure might indicate that the auditor failed to respond adequately to the detected MW or that MWs are more serious, thus warranting prompt disclosure. Our results from comparing the effects across timely and non-timely reporters indicate that timely reporters experience more negative returns at the time of the restatement, relative to non-timely reporters, suggesting that investors perceive the early MW disclosure to signal more pervasive control-related prob-lems. Investors also appear to react negatively to restatements even before the MW has been disclosed, which is an interesting insight since the restatement disclosure is interpreted to have occurred due to an ICFR breach, even though this type of a breakdown has not been formally disclosed. Interestingly, in examining the litigation consequences, our evidence indicates that both timely and non-timely reporters are equally likely to be sued, consistent with the admis-sion of wrongdoing (through either a timely or non-timely MW disclosure) providing strong grounds for establishing scienter. However, timely reporters appear to secure more favorable litigation outcomes: they face higher likelihood of lawsuit dismissals and pay much lower settlements, compared to non-timely reporters. Overall, our evidence pro-vides new insights into how market participants incorporate information about internal control weaknesses into their perceptions regarding the economic implications of a restatement, and financial reporting quality, in general. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We appreciate constructive insights from Ted Christensen (Editor), an anonymous reviewer, Michael Alles, Divya Anan-tharaman, Suresh Govindaraj, Joshua Livnat, and Dan Palmon. We also thank participants at the Fifth Baruch-SWUFE Conference, the 2015 European Accounting Association Annual Congress, and the 2015 Canadian Academic Account-ing Association Annual Meeting. (Paper received January 2016, revised version accepted October 2018) 

REFERENCES 

Advisory Committee on Improvements to Financial Reporting (ACIFR). (2008). Final Report of the Advisory Committee on Improvements to Financial Reporting to the United States Securities and Exchange Commission . Available at: http://www. sec.gov/about/offices/oca/acifr/acifr-finalreport.pdf (accessed December 20, 2018). Ashbaugh-Skaife, H., Collins, D., & Kinney, W. Jr (2007). The discovery and reporting of internal control deficiencies prior to SOX-mandated audits. Journal of Accounting and Economics , 44 (1&2), 166–192. Ashbaugh-Skaife, H., Collins, D., Kinney, W., & LaFond, R. (2008). The effect of internal control deficiencies on firm risk and their remediation on accrual quality. The Accounting Review , 83 (1), 217–250. Beneish, M., Billings, M., & Hodder, L. (2008). Internal control weaknesses and information uncertainty. The Accounting Review ,

83 (3), 665–703. Bédard, J. (2006). Sarbanes Oxley internal control requirements and earnings quality. Working paper. Université Laval – École de comptabilité. Bergstresser, D., & Philippon, T. (2006). CEO incentives and earnings management. Journal of Financial Economics , 80 (3), 511–529. Besch, D. (2009). Remarks before the 2009 AICPA National Conference on current SEC and PCAOB developments . Available at: http://www.sec.gov/news/speech/2009/spch120709db.htm (accessed December 20, 2018). Bierey, M., & Schmidt, M. (2017). What drives the consequences of intentional misstatements? Evidence from rating analysts’ reactions. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting , 44 (1–2), 295–333. 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 102 HE ET AL .

Burks, J. (2011). Are investors confused by restatements after Sarbanes-Oxley? The Accounting Review , 86 (2), 507–539. Callen, J., Livnat, J., & Segal, D. (2006). Accounting restatements: Are they always bad news? Journal of Investing , 15 (3), 57–68. Cazier, R., Christensen, T., Merkley, K., & Treu, J. (2016). Litigation risk and non-GAAP reporting. Working paper. Chin, C.-L., & Chi, H. (2009). Reducing restatements with increased industry expertise. Contemporary Accounting Research , 26 (3), 729–765. Choudhary, P., Merkley, K., & Schipper, K. (2016). Qualitative characteristics of financial reporting errors deemed immaterial by managers. Working Paper. Coates, J. (2007). The goals and promise of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Journal of Economic Perspectives , 21 (1), 91–116. Collins, D., Kothari, S. P., & Rayburn, J. (1987). Firm size and the information content of prices with respect to earnings. Journal of Accounting and Economics , 9(2), 111–138. Connelly, B., Certo, T., Ireland, D., & Reutzel, C. (2010). Signaling theory: A review and assessment. Journal of Management , 37 (1), 39–67. Dechow, P., & Dichev, I. (2002). The quality of accruals and earnings: The role of accrual estimation errors. The Accounting Review , 77 (Supplement), 35–59. Doyle, J., Ge, W., & McVay, S. (2007). Accruals quality and internal control over financial reporting. The Accounting Review , 82 ,1141–1170. Ettredge, M., Li, C., & Sun, L. (2006). The impact of SOX section 404 internal control quality assessment on audit delay in the SOX era. Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory , 25 (2), 1–23. Fama, E., & French, K. (1997). Industry costs of equity. Journal of Financial Economics , 43 (2), 153–193. Files, R. (2012). SEC enforcement: Does forthright disclosure and cooperation really matter? Journal of Accounting and Economics , 53 , 353–374. Francis, J., LaFond, R., Olsson, P., & Schipper, K. (2005). The market pricing of accruals quality. Journal of Accounting and Economics , 39 (2), 295–327. Ghosh, A., & Lee, Y. (2013). Financial reporting quality, structural problems and the informativeness of mandated disclosures on internal controls. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting , 40 (3–4), 318–349. Glass Lewis & Co. (2007). The errors of their ways . Yellow Card Trend Alert, February 27. San Francisco, CA. Gonedes, N. (1978). Corporate signaling, external accounting, and capital market equilibrium: Evidence on dividends, income and extraordinary items. Journal of Accounting Research , 16 (1), 26–79. Gray, P., Koh, P., & Tong, Y. (2009). Accruals quality, information risk and cost of capital: Evidence from Australia. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting , 36 (1–2), 51–72. Hammersley, J., Myers, L., & Shakespeare, C. (2008). Market reactions to the disclosure of internal control weaknesses and to the characteristics of those weaknesses under section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. Review of Accounting Studies ,

13 (1), 141–165. Hennes, K., Leone, A., & Miller, B. (2008). The importance of distinguishing errors from irregularities in restatement research: The case of restatements and CEO/CFO turnover. The Accounting Review , 83 (6), 1487–1519. Hennes, K., Leone, A., & Miller, B. (2014). Determinants and market consequences of auditor dismissals after accounting restatements. The Accounting Review , 89 (3), 1051–1082. Hirschey, M., Smith, K., & Wilson, W. (2015). The timeliness of restatement disclosures and financial reporting credibility. Jour-nal of Business Finance & Accounting , 42 (7–8), 826–859. Hogan, C., Lambert, T., & Schmidt, J. (2013). Do management internal control certifications increase the likelihood of restatement-related litigation? Working paper, Michigan State University, Lehigh University and University of Texas at Austin. Hranaiova, J., & Byers, S. (2007). Changes in market responses to financial statement restatement announcements in the Sarbanes-Oxley era. Working paper. Hribar, P., & Jenkins, N. (2004). The effect of accounting restatements on earnings revisions and the estimated cost of capital. 

Review of Accounting Studies , 9, 337–356. Huang, Y. (2010). When and why did the market reactions to restatement announcements attenuate? Working paper, University of Kansas. Hurson, D. (2006). Before you sue the accountants. The Practical Lawyer , 52 (2), 25–35. 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License HE ET AL . 103 

Institute of Management Accountants (IMA). (2008). Accounting Control Assessment Standards: The Missing Piece in the Restate-ment Puzzle . Discussion paper prepared by the Institute of Management Accountants Finance Governance, Risk, and Com-pliance Research Practice. Jonas, G., Rosenberg, A., & Gale, M. (2006). The second year of section 404 reporting on internal control (New York: Moody 'sInvestors Service). Kaznik, R., & Lev, B. (1995). To warn or not to warn: Management disclosures in the face of an earnings surprise. The Accounting Review , 70 (1), 113–134. Kim, I., & Skinner, D. (2012). Measuring securities litigation risk. Journal of Accounting and Economics , 53 (1–2), 290–310. Kinney, W., & McDaniel, L. (1989). Characteristics of firms correcting previously reported quarterly earnings. Journal of Accounting and Economics , 11 (1), 71–93. Kinney, W., & Shepardson, M. (2011). Do control effectiveness disclosures require SOX 404(B) internal control audits? A natu-ral experiment with small US public companies. Journal of Accounting Research , 49 (2), 413–448. LaCroix, K. (2014). SEC Files Enforcement Action Over Internal Controls Reporting: A Sign of Things to Come? The D&O Diary. Avail-able at: https://www.dandodiary.com/2014/08/articles/securities-litigation/sec-files-enforcement-action-over-internal-controls-reporting-a-sign-of-things-to-come/ (accessed December 20, 2018). Livnat, J., & Zhang, Y. (2012). Information interpretation or information discovery: Which role of analysts do investors value more? Review of Accounting Studies , 17 (3), 612–641. Lobo, G., Song, M., & Stanford, M. (2012). Accruals quality and analyst coverage. Journal of Banking & Finance , 36 (2), 497–508. Lu, H., Richardson, G., & Salterio, S. (2011). Direct and indirect effects of internal control weakness on accrual quality: Evidence from a unique Canadian regulatory setting. Contemporary Accounting Research , 28 (2), 675–707. McNichols, M. (2002). Discussion of the quality of accruals and earnings: The role of accrual estimation errors. The Accounting Review , 77 (Supplement), 61–69. Nagy, A. (2010). Section 404 compliance and financial reporting quality. Accounting Horizons , 24 (3), 441–454. Palmrose, Z., Richardson, V., & Scholz, S. (2004). Determinants of market reactions to restatement announcements. Journal of Accounting and Economics , 37 (1), 59–89. Palmrose, Z., & Scholz, S. (2004). The circumstances and legal consequences of non-GAAP reporting: Evidence from restate-ments. Contemporary Accounting Research , 21 (1), 139–180. Park, J. C., & Wu, Q. (2009). Financial restatements, cost of debt and information spillover: Evidence from the secondary loan market. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting , 39 (9–10), 1117–1147. Public Company Accounting Oversight Board. (2004). Auditing Standard No. 2: An Audit of Internal Control over Financial Reporting Performed in Conjunction with an Audit of Financial Statements (Washington, DC: PCAOB). Public Company Accounting Oversight Board. (2007). Auditing Standard No. 5: An Audit of Internal Control Over Financial Report-ing That Is Integrated with an Audit of Financial Statements (Washington, DC: PCAOB). Public Company Accounting Oversight Board. (2010). Auditing Standard No. 13: The Auditor 's Responses to the Risks of Material Misstatement (Washington, DC: PCAOB). Public Company Accounting Oversight Board. (2015). Concept Release on Audit Quality Indicators (Washington, DC: PCAOB). Rice, S., & Weber, D. (2012). How effective is internal control reporting under SOX 404? Determinants of the (non-)disclosure of existing material weaknesses. Journal of Accounting Research , 50 (3), 811–843. Rice, S., Weber, D., & Wu, B. (2015). Does SOX 404 have teeth? Consequences of the failure to report existing internal control weaknesses. The Accounting Review , 90 (3), 1169–1200. Rogers, J., Skinner, D., & Buskirk, A. (2009). Earnings guidance and market uncertainty. Journal of Accounting and Economics ,

48 (1), 90–109. Scholz, S. (2008). The Changing Nature and Consequences of Public Company Financial Restatements (Washington, DC: The Depart-ment of the Treasury). Srinivasan, S. (2005). Consequences of financial reporting failure for outside directors: Evidence from accounting restatements and audit committee members. Journal of Accounting Research , 43 (2), 291–334. Turner, L., & Weirich, T. (2006). A closer look at financial statement restatements. The CPA Journal , 76 (12), 12–23. Wiedman, C., & Hendricks, K. (2013). Firm accrual quality following restatements: A signaling view. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting , 40 (9–10), 1095–1125. 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 104 HE ET AL .

Wilson, W. (2008). An empirical analysis of the decline in the information content of earnings following restatements. The Accounting Review , 83 (2), 519–548. 

How to cite this article: He L, Sarath B, Wans N. Material weakness disclosures and restatement announce-ments: The joint and order effects. J Bus Fin Acc . 2019;46:68–104. https://doi.org/10.1111/jbfa.12363 14685957, 2019, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12363 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

