Title: CEO equity incentives and the remediation of material weaknesses in internal control

URL Source: blob://pdf/62d86dc0-92c6-4e92-8c18-1f830b41b113

Markdown Content:
DOI: 10.1111/jbfa.12265 

# CEO equity incentives and the remediation of material weaknesses in internal control Xuejiao Liu 1 Xiaohong Liu 2 

> 1

School of Business, University of International Business and Economics, Beijing, China 2 School of Business, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong 

Correspondence 

Xuejiao Liu, School of Business, University of International Business and Economics, No. 10 East Huixin Street, Beijing, China. Email: xjluibe@outlook.com, xuejiaoliu@uibe.edu.cn 

JEL Classification: G14, M41, M48, M52 

## Abstract 

This study examines how CEO equity incentives affect the reme-diation of material weaknesses (MWs) in internal control disclosed pursuant to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX). We find that the sensi-tivity of CEO equity portfolios to stock price (CEO price sensitiv-ity, or delta) has a positive impact on firm promptness in remedy-ing MWs, whereas the sensitivity of CEO equity portfolios to stock return volatility (CEO volatility sensitivity, or vega) has a negative impact on firm promptness in remedying MWs. In addition, we pro-vide evidence that effective boards of directors mitigate the unde-sirable, negative effect of CEO volatility sensitivity on remediation of MWs. Our results shed light on the effects of equity compensa-tion structures on internal control quality in the more transparent, post-SOX environment. 

K E Y W O R D S 

CEO equity incentives, internal control weakness, remediation, Sarbanes-Oxley Act 

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

This study examines how chief executive officer (CEO) equity incentives affect the remediation of material weaknesses (MWs) in internal control that are disclosed pursuant to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX). 1 Healthy internal control is essential to ensure the reliability of a firm’s financial reporting and the achievement of its operating objectives [Com-mittee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO), 2011]. In response to a series of major accounting scandals and corporate failures in the early 2000s, the US Congress passed SOX in 2002 to improve the integrity of financial reporting and protect investors from accounting fraud (US House of Representatives, 2002). In particular, Sections 302 and 404 of SOX (SOX 302 and SOX 404 hereafter) require that firms disclose any MW in internal control over financial reporting in their periodic financial reports (SEC, 2002, 2003). 2 On the one hand, public 1 An MW in internal control is ‘a significant deficiency, or combination of significant deficiencies, that results in more than a remote likelihood that a material misstatement of the annual or interim financial statements will not be prevented or detected’ [Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB), 2004]. 2 As in prior research (e.g., Doyle, Ge, & McVay, 2007a; Goh, 2009), we view disclosure of an MW in internal control as mandatory, but disclosure of a significant deficiency in internal control as voluntary. According to the Office of the Chief Accountant (SEC, 2004), ‘a registrant is obligated to identify and publicly disclose all material weaknesses [in internal control]’; however, ‘if management identifies a significant deficiency it is not obligated by virtue of that fact to publicly disclose the existence or nature of the significant deficiency.’ 

1338 c© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jbfa J Bus Fin Acc. 2017; 44 :1338–1369. LIU AND LIU 1339 

disclosure of MWs triggers a significant decline in a firm’s stock price (e.g., DeFranco, Guan, & Lu, 2005; Gupta & Nayar, 2007; Hammersley, Myers, & Shakespeare, 2008), which can act as a disciplinary mechanism for managers whose com-pensation is tied to stock price. On the other hand, as firms with internal control weaknesses tend to have higher information and operating risk (e.g., Ashbaugh-Skaife, Collins, Kinney, & LaFond, 2009), managers whose compensa-tion increases with firm risk may have an incentive to delay the remediation of internal control weaknesses. Our main objective is to examine how these opposing incentives resulting from internal control disclosure and managers’ equity compensation (stocks and stock options) impact management actions in the remediation of MWs. Kobelsky, Lim, and Jha (2013) and Balsam, Jiang, and Lu (2014) are the first to assess the role of executive com-pensation in the context of firm internal control. They report an inverse relation between managers’ price sensitivity (the sensitivity of equity compensation to stock price, also known as delta) and the existence/disclosure of MWs by comparing firms that disclosed MWs with those that did not disclose in the first two years following enactment of SOX 404. However, because SOX is an unexpected regulatory change, internal control statuses disclosed in the short period following SOX enactment largely reflect managers’ pre-SOX internal control decisions. 3 Thus, the inferences drawn on the post-SOX equity incentives in these studies are likely based on a sample comprising mainly pre-SOX internal control decisions (which are revealed due to the SOX disclosure regulation). In addition, in analyzing equity incentives, these studies do not consider the risk-seeking incentive provided by man-agers’ volatility sensitivity, that is, the sensitivity of equity compensation to stock return volatility, or vega. Since delta and vega are positively correlated (see Table 3) and are inherent in stock- and option-based compensation, omission of vega may lead to incomplete and biased inferences. 4Our research objective and design differ from those of the previously mentioned studies in two key respects. First, we exploit the shift in disclosure regime (brought about by SOX), which caused significant stock price declines for firms reporting MWs in internal control, to investigate how managers respond to losses in their stock price-based wealth through changing/remedying ineffective internal controls. By analyzing managers’ remediation behavior, we investi-gate the tradeoff between equity benefits and costs in moving away from ineffective internal controls under the more transparent, post-SOX disclosure regime. More specifically, firms’ initial disclosures of MWs under SOX present a quasi-experimental setting where we attempt to identify a causal relation between managers’ equity incentives and their remediation behavior in a short window of one year following MW disclosure. In this setting, remediation incentives derive from market reaction to unanticipated MW disclosure and managers’ pre-existing (i.e., pre-disclosure) equity holdings. Therefore, the equity incentives are exogenous to the determination of managers’ subsequent remediation behavior. This quasi-experiment helps us to examine the effects of equity incentives on internal control decisions. 5The second key difference between our research and both Kobelsky et al. (2013) and Balsam et al. (2014) is that we distinguish between the different roles of price and volatility sensitivities derived from equity compensation, whereas they consider only price sensitivity. We thus mitigate the omitted correlated variable problem in their studies and pro-vide a more comprehensive perspective on the effects of managerial equity incentives on firm internal control. Our main analyses focus on CEO incentives because CEOs are the ultimate leaders, planners, and coordinators of internal control, especially for those control activities that are at the firm level or cut across different units of a firm, such as prevention of management override, fraud detection controls, and compliance with corporate policies and procedures (Moody’s, 2006; COSO, 2011). 3 Since firms need time to adjust their internal control positions (i.e., to fix MWs) following the external shock of SOX, most of the MWs disclosed in the short period following enactment of SOX reflect managers’ pre-SOX internal control decisions rather than their optimal decisions in the post-SOX period. Consistent with this view, we find that the proportion of firms disclosing MWs in SOX 404 reports decreased from 15.8 percent in 2004 to 3.9 percent in 2009 and leveled off after 2009, suggesting a transition period in which firms adapted to the post-SOX environment. 4 Consistent with this concern, Armstrong, Larcker, Ormazabal, and Taylor (2013, p. 327) find that ‘jointly considering the incentive effects of both portfolio delta and portfolio vega substantially alters inferences reported in [the] prior literature [on earnings management].’ 5 Our results cannot be inferred from those of Kobelsky et al. (2013) and Balsam et al. (2014). They find that CEO price sensitivity is not significantly associated with the existence/disclosure of MWs when chief financial officer (CFO) price sensitivity is separately included in the regression. In contrast, we find that CEO price sensitivity has a significantly positive impact on the remediation of MWs even after controlling for CFO price sensitivity (see Section 5). We also note that, in an additional analysis, Balsam et al. (2014, table 7) examine the relation between MW remediation and both the level and change in price sensitivity. The results in their remediation analysis differ from our results. 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 1340 LIU AND LIU 

We posit that CEO equity holdings provide two opposite incentives for the remediation of MWs in internal con-trol following their initial disclosure, depending on the relation of the equity holdings to stock price and stock return volatility. First, the value of stock and stock options decreases as stock price slumps in response to disclosure of MWs (e.g., Gupta & Nayar, 2007; Hammersley et al., 2008). This relation gives CEOs an incentive to promptly remedy MWs to prevent further losses in their stock price-based wealth. We thus hypothesize that, ceteris paribus , CEO price sensi-tivity has a positive impact on firm promptness in remedying MWs in internal control. We measure price sensitivity as the dollar change in the value of the CEO’s stock and option portfolios resulting from a 1 percent change in stock price (Core & Guay, 2002). Second, CEOs could forgo some of their stock risk/volatility-based wealth by moving from weak internal controls to stronger internal controls, because the value of stock options is positivity related to firm risk (Black & Scholes, 1973), and firms tend to have higher information risk and excessive operating risk under a weak control and monitoring sys-tem (e.g., Ashbaugh-Skaife et al., 2009). Therefore, CEOs with option holdings have an incentive to delay rectifying internal control deficiencies. We thus hypothesize that, ceteris paribus , CEO volatility sensitivity has a negative impact on firm promptness in remedying MWs in internal control. We measure volatility sensitivity as the partial derivative of CEO equity holdings with respect to stock return volatility, namely, the dollar change in the value of the CEO’s option portfolio resulting from a 1 percent change in stock return volatility (Core & Guay, 2002). 6We then empirically test these hypotheses using a sample of firms that disclosed MWs in internal control for the first time at their fiscal year-end, between November 2003 and August 2006, under SOX 302 or SOX 404. 7 Our empirical measure of firm remediation promptness is an indicator variable that takes the value of one (zero) if a firm remedies (fails to remedy) the MWs, as attested by auditor opinions, in the fiscal year following initial disclosure of MWs. Our empirical results are consistent with these hypotheses. Specifically, we find that, ceteris paribus , as the sensitiv-ity of CEO equity portfolios to stock prices (delta) increases, firms are more likely to promptly remedy MWs in internal control. In contrast, as the sensitivity of CEO equity portfolios to stock return volatility (vega) increases, firms are less likely to promptly remedy MWs in internal control. In terms of economic significance, our results suggest that a one standard deviation increase in CEO delta from its mean increases the likelihood of timely remediation of MWs by 12 percent, whereas a similar increase in CEO vega reduces the likelihood of timely remediation of MWs by 9 percent. Finally, we provide evidence that effective boards of directors mitigate the undesirable, negative effects of CEO vega on the remediation of MWs. This moderating effect from corporate governance provides additional evidence consis-tent with our argument that our results are likely to be causal instead of correlational (e.g., Jha & Chen, 2015). Our results are also robust to the use of a two-stage instrumental variable estimation approach that further accounts for the endogenous nature of CEO equity incentives (Armstrong & Vashishtha, 2012). We provide three main contributions. First, our study sheds light on the CEO tradeoff between equity benefits and costs in moving away from ineffective firm internal controls under the more transparent, post-SOX disclosure regime. Our results imply that when the price-driven losses managers suffer from public revelation of internal con-trol weaknesses exceed any risk-driven benefits they enjoy under a weak control system, these personal losses not only impel managers to remedy existing weaknesses, they also act as a credible threat to deter managers from choos-ing ineffective internal controls in the future. This evidence suggests that the disclosure regulation in SOX provides a channel for a compensation structure that creates high delta, rather than one that creates high vega, to facilitate market-based discipline on managers, thereby strengthening firm internal control. Our results are consistent with evi-dence of a decrease in the (positive) relation between executive delta and earnings management from the pre- to the 6 Since price and volatility sensitivities provide opposite incentives for MW remediation, the net effect of a CEO’s equity portfolio on that CEO’s remediation action depends on which of the two opposite incentives arising from the equity portfolio is dominant. 7 As explained subsequently (in Section 3), our sample (of firms that disclosed MWs for the first time under SOX) begins November 15, 2003, one year before the first batch of SOX 404 audit opinions under Auditing Standard No. 2 (or AS2; see PCAOB, 2004) became available, so that we can check all disclosed MWs with subsequent audit opinions in firm annual reports to confirm their remediation statuses. Our sample ends August 27, 2006, one year prior to the earliest adoption of Auditing Standard No. 5 (or AS5; see PCAOB, 2007), which provides a different set of guidelines for auditors to express an opinion on internal control effectiveness compared with AS2, to avoid potential confounding effects of the disparities between AS2 and AS5. 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License LIU AND LIU 1341 

post-SOX period (Cohen, Dey, & Lys, 2008; Jiang, Petroni, & Wang, 2010) 8 and enhance our understanding of how equity compensation structures influence internal control quality in the post-SOX environment. Second, our results on executive volatility sensitivity (vega) add to an emerging literature that explores the eco-nomic settings in which option compensation, and the induced risk-taking behavior, can be excessive or value-destroying (e.g., Dong, Wang, & Xie, 2010; Armstrong & Vashishtha, 2012; Armstrong et al., 2013; Chen, Truong, & Veeraraghavan, 2015). For example, Dong et al. (2010) find that vega induces suboptimal capital structure policies. Consistent with theoretical predictions by Acharya and Bisin (2009), Armstrong and Vashishtha (2012) find that vega is associated with management seeking excessive systematic risk. Moreover, Armstrong et al. (2013) find that vega encourages earnings management. A key result of our analyses—that compensation structures that create high vega can discourage CEOs from adopting effective internal control—alerts us to a potential adverse effect of option com-pensation on firm internal control. This result, along with the positive effect of CEO delta on internal control, has prac-tical implications for firm compensation committees in their attempts to align executive incentives with shareholder interests. 9 Moreover, our inferences drawing upon the relationship between CEO equity incentives and the remedia-tion of MWs could be applied to other events that trigger a change in firm share value and share risk. Third, we contribute to the literature on the role of boards of directors in monitoring managerial behavior (e.g., Beasley, 1996; Dechow, Sloan, & Sweeney, 1996; Klein, 2002; Goh, 2009; Jennings & Marques, 2011). Consistent with Goh (2009), we find a positive association between board effectiveness and firm promptness in remedying MWs. We also provide an incremental contribution by providing evidence of an interactive effect between board effectiveness and CEO incentives, specifically, that effective boards mitigate the undesirable, risking-taking incentive caused by CEO option holdings. 

## 2 RESEARCH SETTING AND HYPOTHESIS DEVELOPMENT 2.1 Research setting: The remediation of internal control weaknesses 

The internal control disclosures mandated by SOX lead to significant stock price declines for firms reporting MWs in internal control (e.g., Gupta & Nayar, 2007; Beneish, Billings, & Hodder, 2008). We exploit unanticipated MW dis-closures (i.e., firms disclosing MWs for the first time) under SOX as a unique research setting to investigate how CEOs respond to losses in their stock price-based wealth by changing/remedying ineffective internal controls. More specifically, we investigate how CEO equity incentives impact CEO response, that is, remediation actions, in a short window (one year) following initial MW disclosure. In this setting, the equity incentives CEOs face after MW disclo-sure, but before taking remediation actions, derive from stock price reaction to unanticipated MW disclosure and pre-existing (pre-disclosure) equity portfolios, and are therefore exogenous to determination of subsequent remedi-ation behavior. To see this, note that the board of directors is unlikely to have incorporated the CEO’s remediation behavior into the pre-disclosure compensation contracts, due to lack of knowledge of MWs at the time the board designed the compensation contracts. 10 Hence, the remediation analysis conditional on firm initial MW disclosures 8 Specifically, Jiang et al. (2010) find that in the pre-SOX (post-SOX) period, executive price sensitivity is positively associated (has no association) with earnings management. 9 An implication of our research is that the board could design equity incentives conditional on the status of the company’s internal control. Specifically, when internal control is strong, high vega may be desirable because any projects with excessive risk would be screened out by internal control procedures. When internal control is relatively weak, low vega may be desirable for fear that no sufficient safeguard is in place to prevent inappropriate risk-taking. 10 Hoitash, Hoitash, and Johnstone (2012) find no association between MW disclosures and contemporaneous changes in CEO compensation. In their CFO analysis, they report a negative association between (prior year) MW disclosures and changes in CFO compensation. As their sample includes repeated MW disclosures, the observed change in the value of CFO equity compensation is likely the outcome of prior-year MW disclosures and subsequent remediation actions (for a discussion on lag effects, see Hoitash et al., 2012, p. 796). Hsu and Liao (2012) provide further evidence that compensation committees adjust executive compensation by referring to prior MW disclosures. 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 1342 LIU AND LIU 

helps us alleviate the problem of reverse causality in examining the effects of equity incentives on internal control decisions. 11 It is noteworthy that our remediation analysis is conditional on firms reporting MWs in internal control. Firms reporting effective internal controls are not subject to the consequences of MW disclosure and are thus uninforma-tive in examining the causal relation between the changes in managers’ equity payoff, triggered by MW disclosure, and subsequent remediation behavior. We next examine in detail how managerial equity incentives affect remedia-tion behavior, characterized by the likelihood of prompt remediation of MWs in the fiscal year following their initial disclosure. We refer to the fiscal year following firm initial disclosure of MWs as the remediation year/period. 

## 2.2 Impact of CEO price sensitivity on the remediation of internal control weaknesses 

As the value of stock and stock options increases with stock price, CEOs with equity holdings have an incentive to take actions that maximize stock price. In the pre-SOX era, in which management actions with respect to the choice of internal control quality and earnings quality were normally unobservable to the public, these actions could either serve shareholder interests or be opportunistic and fraudulent. While Erickson, Hanlon, and Maydew (2006) do not find consistent evidence that executive price sensitivity is associated with accounting fraud during the period 1996–2003, most studies using pre-SOX data find that earnings manipulation is more pronounced in firms in which executive com-pensation is more sensitive to firm share price (e.g., Cheng & Warfield, 2005; Bergstresser & Philippon, 2006; Weber, 2006). 12 However, SOX requires firms to disclose CEO actions with respect to choice of internal control quality. This mandate inflicts new losses on CEOs who choose ineffective firm controls, because it allows the market to observe and penalize such CEOs through negative stock price reactions, thereby suppressing opportunistic management behavior and improving internal control quality. 13 Specifically, MWs in internal control imply that the control system designed to help the firm achieve its operating objectives, protect its resources, and prevent accounting fraud, is defective. Thus, public revelation of MWs lowers investor expectation of firm future cash flows and increases investor assessment of firm risks, leading to decreases in stock price. 14 Prior studies find that firms that disclose internal control deficiencies experience credit rating down-grades (Moody’s, 2004), shareholder dissatisfaction with the board of directors (Ye, Hermanson, & Krishnan, 2013), increases in costs of debt and equity capital (Ashbaugh-Skaife et al., 2009; Costello & Wittenberg-Moerman, 2011; Dhaliwal, Hogan, Trezevant, & Wilkins, 2011; Kim, Song, & Zhang, 2011b), 15 and declines in stock price (e.g., DeFranco et al., 2005; Gupta & Nayar, 2007; Beneish et al., 2008; Hammersley et al., 2008). Negative market reactions persist if firms fail to remedy previously disclosed MWs (Ashbaugh-Skaife, Collins, Kinney, & LaFond, 2008, 2009; Hammersley, Myers, & Zhou, 2012). Therefore, we expect that CEOs whose equity holdings are more sensitive to stock price suf-fer greater losses from the public disclosure of MWs and, hence, are more likely to remedy MWs promptly to prevent further decreases in their stock price-based wealth. This logic leads to the following hypothesis. 11 Reverse causality, or simultaneity, arises when boards of directors design compensation contracts with the objective of influencing the manager’s action to remedy the disclosed MWs. In that case, the board’s objective of influencing remediation behavior would be a cause of the observed variation in compensation contracts. 12 Using both pre- and post-SOX data from the period 2001–2005, Armstrong, Jagolinzer, and Larcker (2010) do not find evidence of a positive association between CEO price sensitivity and accounting irregularities. 13 While our analysis focuses on equity price-based losses, disclosure of MWs in internal control also inflicts other costs on firm managers, including reputation loss, reduced job security, and pressure from the board of directors. 14 See Lambert et al. (2007) for the linkages between accounting information quality (or the quality of internal control over information and assets), firm risk, and stock price. They find that decreasing the quality of information about firm value increases investor assessment of firm systematic risk, leading to a reduction in firm stock price. The main reason for their result is that accounting information is expected to resolve not only some firm uncertainty that is idiosyncratic but also some firm uncertainty that is related to market-wide factors. 15 In contrast to Ashbaugh-Skaife et al. (2009), Ogneva, Subramanyam, and Raghunandan (2007) do not find an association between internal control deficien-cies and the cost of equity capital. The ‘no effect’ result, however, is likely due to a ‘look-ahead’ misclassification of firms with and without internal control deficiencies (for a detailed discussion, see Ashbaugh-Skaife et al., 2009, pp. 37–38). Ashbaugh-Skaife et al. (2009) find that the insignificant relation between internal control deficiencies and implied costs of equity in the research design of Ogneva et al. (2007) becomes significantly positive after an appropriate reclassification. 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License LIU AND LIU 1343 

H1a: Ceteris paribus , CEO price sensitivity (i.e., the sensitivity of CEO stock and option portfolios to stock price, or delta) is positively associated with firm promptness in remedying MWs in internal control. 

## 2.3 Impact of CEO volatility sensitivity on the remediation of internal control weaknesses 

The value of stock options increases with firm risk due to the convex payoff structure, which protects option holders from firm downside risks (Black & Scholes, 1973; Jensen & Meckling, 1976). 16 In remedying MWs in internal control, CEOs face a tradeoff between reducing equity price-based losses and forgoing equity risk-based benefits. To explain this tradeoff, note that on the one hand, CEOs have an incentive to restore a healthy control system to prevent further equity losses from stock price declines (see H1a). On the other hand, moving from weak internal control to strong internal control could reduce firm information risk and curb CEO excessive risk-taking, thereby reducing the value of CEO option holdings. Specifically, the remediation of internal control weaknesses may reduce firm information risk. Prior research indi-cates that ineffective internal control results in low-quality financial reporting (e.g., Doyle, Ge, & McVay, 2007b; Ashbaugh-Skaife et al., 2008), which implies high information risk, that is, high uncertainty about firm value for investors. This high uncertainty, unresolved by financial reports, translates into greater variability in stock prices (e.g., Pastor & Veronesi, 2003; Easley & O’Hara, 2004, Lambert, Leuz, & Verrecchia, 2007; Rajgopal & Venkatachalam, 2011). Consistent with this line of reasoning, Ashbaugh-Skaife et al. (2009) find that firms disclosing internal control deficien-cies exhibit higher firm risk relative to those with effective internal controls. Moreover, their change analyses indicate that initial disclosures of internal control deficiencies increase firm risk and that subsequent remediation of these defi-ciencies reduces firm risk. The negative relation between internal control quality and firm risk implies that CEOs may cash in some of their options at a higher value by delaying fixing internal control problems. In addition, the remediation of internal control weaknesses may curb CEO excessive risk-taking and therefore reduce firm future cash flow variability/risk. Prior studies find that managers’ volatility sensitivity derived from option compensation may induce them to undertake risky projects that increase their personal wealth but destroy shareholder value (e.g., Acharya & Bisin, 2009; Armstrong & Vashishtha, 2012). 17 Firm-level internal control weak-nesses, such as an ineffective control environment, management override, pervasive ineffective processes, and non-compliance with corporate policies and procedures, are often associated with severe agency problems. 18 Fixing firm-level control weaknesses may result in improved monitoring of management and tighter control over excessive risk-taking, which would reduce or eliminate a portion of favorable upper-tail outcomes for the firm, thus reducing the value of CEO option holdings. Hence, CEOs who wish to undertake unduly risky projects to boost future cash flow variability may be loath to strengthen firm internal control. Our analysis thus far focuses on the positive relation between option compensation and risk-taking incentives, with-out considering managerial risk aversion. A risk-averse CEO also experiences a loss in expected utility when equity portfolio risk increases. The disutility from risk exposure may counteract the risk-taking incentive from option hold-ings (e.g., Lambert, Larcker, & Verrecchia, 1991). Nevertheless, risk aversion is likely to be a secondary effect when considering the incentive effects of stock options, as the empirical research generally finds a positive relation between 16 The payoff from stock is also convex due to the limited liability of stockholders, which implies that the value of the stock is also sensitive to stock return volatility. However, Guay (1999) finds that the volatility sensitivity of stock is substantially less than that of stock options. Thus, as in prior literature (e.g., Knopf et al., 2002; Rajgopal & Shevlin, 2002; Low, 2009), we consider volatility sensitivity provided by stock options in main analyses. Our results remain qualitatively the same when volatility sensitivity is calculated using both option and stock. 17 To the extent that excessive risk-taking increases firm systematic risk and default risk, it may lead to discounts in stock price. In particular, managers with option grants who can diversify firm systematic risk may engage in excessive systematic risk-seeking activities (see Armstrong & Vashishtha, 2012). As healthy internal control helps rectify such inappropriate risk-taking, managers who seek excessive systematic risk would be reluctant to restore healthy internal con-trol. 18 According to PCAOB (2004, AS2, para. 15), ‘all controls that could materially affect financial reporting, including controls that focus primarily on the effec-tiveness and efficiency of operations or compliance with laws and regulations and also have a material effect on the reliability of financial reporting, are a part of internal control over financial reporting.’ 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 1344 LIU AND LIU 

managerial vega and risk-taking (e.g., Knopf, Nam, & Thornton, 2002; Rajgopal & Shevlin, 2002; Coles, Daniel, & Naveen, 2006; Low, 2009; Gormley, Matsa, & Milbourn, 2013). In sum, since the remediation of MWs in internal control can reduce firm information risk and curb inappropri-ate/excessive risk-taking, 19 we expect that, ceteris paribus , CEOs whose compensation is more positively related to firm risk have greater incentive to delay the remediation of MWs. This logic leads to the following hypothesis. 

H1b: Ceteris paribus , CEO volatility sensitivity (i.e., the sensitivity of CEO option portfolio to stock return volatility, or vega) is negatively associated with firm promptness in remedying MWs in internal control. The preceding ceteris paribus analysis indicates that price and volatility sensitivities, both stemming from equity compensation, provide opposite incentives for MW remediation. For any given equity portfolio, their net effect on CEO remediation action depends on which of the two competing forces is dominant. For example, when options make up the majority of a CEO’s equity portfolio, volatility sensitivity (vega) is likely to outweigh price sensitivity (delta), inducing the CEO to delay the remediation of MWs. 20 Observe that in our research setting, although the change in CEO equity payoff (i.e., a loss in equity price-based wealth) is triggered by SOX-induced MW disclosure, the cross-sectional variations in the change in equity payoff (i.e., the price-driven losses, net of any risk-driven benefits, CEOs face following MW disclosure) are determined by the pre-disclosure compensation structures. H1a and H1b address how cross-sectional variations in equity incentives explain variation in remediation promptness. 

## 2.4 Board oversight of undesirable CEO incentives 

A large body of research examines the role of corporate governance, including boards of directors and their sub-committees, in overseeing management functions and ensuring proper alignment of the interests of managers and shareholders. This stream of research focuses primarily on the relation between corporate governance and manage-rial/corporate behavior. It provides evidence that strong corporate governance reduces earnings manipulation (e.g., Klein, 2002; Weber, 2006; Cornett, Marcus, & Tehranian, 2008; Jennings & Marques, 2011), improves internal control quality (e.g., Krishnan, 2005; Zhang, Zhou, & Zhou, 2007), and accelerates the remediation of previously reported inter-nal control deficiencies (e.g., Goh, 2009; Johnstone, Li, & Rupley, 2011). However, very few studies examine the effect of corporate governance on the association between managerial compensation and managerial behavior. An exception is Weber (2006), who finds that, although effective governance reduces earnings smoothing, it does not influence the positive association between CEO price sensitivity and earnings smoothing. We address the question of whether boards of directors, which play a critical role in corporate governance, can combat management’s incentive to delay resolution of internal control problems, by examining the effect of board effectiveness on the (negative) relation between CEO volatility sensitivity and MW remediation. In so doing, we seek evidence on the channels through which boards play an oversight role. If effective boards understand managerial incen-tives and discipline managers who are incentivized to delay the remediation of internal control weaknesses, then we expect the following hypothesis to hold. 21 

H2: Effective boards of directors mitigate the negative impact of CEO volatility sensitivity on firm promptness in remedying MWs. 19 Note that the remediation of internal control weaknesses does not reduce appropriate risk-taking activities induced by stock options. 20 Price sensitivity is present in both stocks and options. In particular, the price sensitivity of an option (before being multiplied by 1 percent of the stock price) ranges between zero (if far out of the money) and one (if deep in the money), whereas the price sensitivity of a share of the underlying stock (before being multiplied by 1 percent of the stock price) equals one (e.g., Core & Guay, 2002). Volatility sensitivity pertains mainly to stock options. Guay (1999) points out that ‘Convexity provided by common stock, on the other hand, is several orders of magnitude lower than that of stock options, and is of little economic importance.’ We thus follow prior studies (e.g., Knopf et al., 2002; Rajgopal & Shevlin, 2002; Low, 2009) and calculate volatility sensitivity using parameters of option grants (see Appendix A). 21 Examples of the board’s interference in the restoration of healthy internal control include setting up a special task committee to oversee the management’s rectification of internal control weaknesses, or hiring an external consulting firm to work with the management on specific plans to overhaul internal control. 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License LIU AND LIU 1345 

## 3 SAMPLE SELECTION, VARIABLE MEASUREMENT, AND EMPIRICAL MODEL 3.1 Regulatory background and sample selection 

As directed by SOX 302, the SEC (2002) requires listed firms to include in their quarterly and annual reports manage-ment’s assessment of the effectiveness of firm internal control, effective August 29, 2002. According to the Office of the Chief Accountant (SEC, 2004), ‘a registrant is obligated to identify and publicly disclose all material weaknesses [in internal control].’ As directed by SOX 404(b), the SEC (2003) further requires listed firms to include in their annual reports the auditor’s attestation on management’s assessment of internal control. Firms with market capitalization above $75 million (i.e., accelerated filers) and their auditors must comply with SOX 404 for fiscal years ending on or after November 15, 2004 (SEC, 2003; PCAOB, 2004). Issued June 2004, AS2 (PCAOB, 2004) provides guidelines to help auditors comply with SOX 404 in rendering opin-ions on the effectiveness of firm internal control. An unqualified opinion means that the firm’s internal control is effec-tive; whereas an adverse opinion means that the internal control has at least one MW and thus is ineffective. AS2 was later superseded by AS5 (PCAOB, 2007), which came into effect November 15, 2007 (with early adoptions allowed beginning August 27, 2007). Compared with AS2, AS5 places greater emphasis on principles and risk and is more cus-tomizable to firms of different sizes and complexity (e.g., Cox, 2007; Doogar, Sivadasan, & Solomon, 2010). 22 A survey by the Global Audit Information Network of the Institute of Internal Auditors (Goldberg, 2007) finds that, among a group of early AS5 adopters, 59 percent reported that their organizations decreased the scope for initial testing of internal control by 11 to 50 percent under AS5, compared with AS2. Doogar et al. (2010), Krishnan, Krishnan, and Song (2011), and Wang and Zhou (2012) find that auditors charge lower fees following the switch from the AS2 to the AS5 regime. Specifically, Doogar et al. (2010) find that, consistent with a switch to risk-oriented internal control audits, AS5, but not AS2, audit fees are sensitive to client fraud risk. Moreover, Acito, Hogan, and Imdieke (2014) find that auditors are less likely to identify MWs under AS5 than AS2. Our initial sample consists of all 1,256 firms in the AuditAnalytics database that disclosed MWs in internal control for the first time in their annual reports between November 15, 2003, and August 27, 2006. 23,24 The sample period begins November 15, 2003, one year before the first batch of SOX 404 audit opinions based on AS2 became avail-able, so that all disclosed MWs can be checked with subsequent audit opinions to confirm their remediation statuses. Our determination of remediation status is consistent with previous studies (e.g., Ashbaugh-Skaife et al., 2008; Goh, 2009). The sample period ends August 27, 2006, one year prior to the earliest adoption of AS5, to avoid the potential confounding effects of the differences between AS2 and AS5. 25 We then exclude from the sample: (1) firms that did not have audit opinions on internal control at the end of the remediation year; 26 (2) firms that lack necessary information from the AuditAnalytics or Compustat databases to compute regression variables (other than board effectiveness and CEO compensation variables); (3) firms that lack information on board characteristics, which is manually collected from proxy statements in the EDGAR database, to 22 See the Appendix of Doogar et al. (2010, pp. 811–812) for more discussion on the differences between AS2 and AS5. 23 As explained previously (Section 2), for the purpose of causal analysis, we restrict our sample to firms that disclosed MWs for the first time under SOX. Thus, from the 1,792 distinct firms that disclosed MWs in their annual reports during the sample period, 536 firms are deleted because they had reported MWs once or multiple times prior to the start of the sample period, resulting in a sample of 1,256 firms. 24 Our sample includes only firms that made initial MW disclosures in annual reports, because audit opinions on internal control are available only in annual reports and we require sample firms to have an equal remediation period of one year for a consistent measure of remediation promptness across firms. To see this, consider two firms A and B, both with fiscal year-end on December 31. Suppose that firm A (firm B) disclosed MWs for the first time at the end of its second (fourth) quarter of 2004. The comparison of remediation promptness between A and B based on their subsequent SOX 404 audit opinions would be problematic, as firm B has six months more remediation time than firm A. 25 Nonetheless, by extending our sample period to include a group of initial MWs disclosed by firms whose internal control were subsequently evaluated under AS5, our results remain qualitatively the same (see also Section 5.6). 26 A total of 729 firms did not have subsequent SOX 404 audit opinions, among which 597 firms were non-accelerated filers (i.e., firms with a market capital-ization below $75 million) and were thus exempt from SOX 404(b) (SEC, 2010) and 132 firms terminated their securities registration before filing subsequent annual reports. 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 1346 LIU AND LIU 

TA B L E 1 Sample selection procedure 

No. 

Firms from AuditAnalytics that disclosed material weaknesses (MWs) in internal control for the first time at their fiscal year-end between November 15, 2003, and August 27, 2006 1,256 

Less : Firms that did not have audit opinions on internal control at the end of the remediation year due to exemption from SOX 404(b) (597) 

Less : Firms that terminated their securities registration before filing subsequent annual reports and thus did not have audit opinions on internal control at the end of the remediation year (132) 

Less : Firms that lack necessary information from AuditAnalytics or Compustat to compute regression variables (other than board effectiveness and CEO compensation variables) (12) 

Less : Firms that lack information on board characteristics from EDGAR to compute board effectiveness (89) 

Less : Firms that lack information on CEO compensation from ExecuComp or EDGAR to compute compensation variables (41) 

Less : Firms that experienced CEO turnover during the remediation year (62) Final sample 323 Firms that remedied MWs within the remediation year ( PROMPT = 1) 234 Firms that failed to remedy MWs within the remediation year ( PROMPT = 0) 89 Our initial sample contains 1,256 distinct firms from AuditAnalytics that disclosed MWs in internal control for the first time at their fiscal year-end between November 15, 2003, and August 27, 2006. The final sample consists of 323 firms, among which 234 (89) firms remedied (failed to remedy) MWs within the remediation year, i.e., the fiscal year following initial disclosure of MWs. PROMPT is an indicator variable that equals 1 if a firm remedied MWs within the remediation year, 0 otherwise. compute board effectiveness; (4) firms that lack information on CEO compensation, which is collected from Execu-Comp or proxy statements; 27 and (5) firms that experienced CEO turnover during the remediation year. 28 The final sample comprises 323 firms that disclosed MWs for the first time in their annual reports between November 15, 2003, and August 27, 2006. Among them, 234 (89) firms remedied (failed to remedy) MWs in internal control within the one-year remediation period. Table 1 describes the sample selection procedure. 

## 3.2 Variable measurement 3.2.1 Remediation promptness 

Our measure of remediation promptness is an indicator variable, denoted by PROMPT , which equals one if the firm remedied MWs, as verified by an unqualified audit opinion on internal control, in the fiscal year following initial dis-closure of MWs, zero otherwise. We focus on a short window of one year in examining remediation behavior to avoid effects from potential longer-window changes in board structure and executive remuneration packages. 

3.2.2 CEO equity incentives 

For each firm that made its initial MW disclosure at the end of (fiscal) year t, we measure the CEO’s equity incentives for remedying MWs in year t + 1 based on the CEO’s equity holdings at the end of year t, which are largely determined by compensation contracts established prior to the end of year t. This empirical construction reflects the fact that CEOs’ equity incentives following initial MW disclosures originate from their pre-determined compensation contracts and thus are exogenous to determination of their subsequent remediation action. We denote CEO price sensitivity by DELTA , which is calculated as the dollar change in the value of a CEO’s stock portfolio resulting from a 1 percent change in stock price, plus the dollar change in the value of the CEO’s option portfolio resulting from a 1 percent change in stock price. All dollar amounts in this study are stated in millions of 27 For firms without compensation data from the ExecuComp database, we manually collected the data from proxy statements in the EDGAR database. 28 We exclude firms with CEO turnover because the pre-disclosure compensation, which is required for our causal analysis, does not exist for newly hired CEOs. 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License LIU AND LIU 1347 

2003 US dollars to control for inflation. We denote CEO volatility sensitivity by VEGA , which is calculated as the dol-lar change in the value of the CEO’s option portfolio resulting from a 1 percent change in stock return volatility. Our estimation of the value of an option portfolio follows the Core and Guay (2002) one-year approximation method. 

3.2.3 Effectiveness of boards of directors 

For each firm that made its initial MW disclosure at the end of year t, we construct a composite variable, denoted by 

BODEFF , based on various characteristics of the board of directors at the end of year t, to capture the overall effective-ness of the board that oversee the remediation of MWs in year t + 1. Using a composite measure for the strength of corporate governance is commonplace in the literature (e.g., Bushman, Chen, Engel, & Smith, 2004; DeFond, Hann, & Hu, 2005). It facilitates our empirical analysis of H2, which concerns the interaction between board effectiveness and CEO volatility sensitivity. Goh (2009) finds that firms with large audit committees, more financial experts on the audit committee, and more independent directors on the board are more likely to remedy MWs in a timely manner. We thus calculate BODEFF based on audit committee size, audit committee financial expertise, and board independence. Audit committee size is calculated as the proportion of board directors who are audit committee members; audit committee financial expertise is calculated as the proportion of audit committee members who are accounting or non-accounting financial experts (DeFond et al., 2005); and board independence is calculated as the proportion of board directors who are independent. We then dichotomize audit committee size by assigning the value of one to firms with committee size equal to or greater than the sample median, zero otherwise. Audit committee financial expertise and board independence are dichotomized similarly. The composite measure of board effectiveness, BODEFF , equals the sum of the dichotomized values of audit committee size, audit committee financial expertise, and board independence. 

## 3.3 Empirical models 3.3.1 Empirical model to test H1a and H1b 

We use the following probit model to test H1a and H1b, which concern the impacts of CEO price and volatility sensi-tivities on firm promptness in remedying MWs: 

PROMPT i, t +1 = ?? 0 + ?? 1 DELTA i, t + ?? 2 VEGA i, t + ?? 3 SALARY i, t + ?? 4 BONUS i, t + ?? 5 JOBSECURITY i, t 

+ ?? 6 BODEFF i, t + ?? 7 NONAUDFEE i, t +1 + ?? 8 BIG i, t +1 + ?? 9 NEWAUD i, t +1 + ?? 10 NEWCFO i, t +1

+ ?? 11 LNTA i, t +1 + ?? 12 ROA i, t +1 + ?? 13 SEVERITY i, t + ?? 14 TURNOVER i, t +1 + ?? 15 FOREIGN i, t +1

+ ?? 16 MA i, t +1 + ?? 17 LEV i, t +1 + ?? 18 LOSS i, t +1 + ?? 19 INDRISK j + ?? 20 SOX 404 i, t +1 + Error Term, (1) where the dependent variable PROMPT i is the indicator for firm i’s remediation promptness. Unless otherwise speci-fied, all independent variables in Model (1) are measured at the beginning of the remediation year. The test variables are CEO price and volatility sensitivities, denoted by DELTA and VEGA , respectively. Hypothesis H1a (H1b) predicts that price (volatility) sensitivity has a positive (negative) impact on firm promptness in remedying MWs, which translates to the prediction ?? 1 > 0 ( ?? 2 < 0). We control for various factors that may affect firm promptness in remedying MWs. We include CEO cash compen-sation, which comprises salaries ( SALARY ) and bonuses ( BONUS ). Cash compensation is related to position, reputation, and labor market opportunities. Moreover, boards of directors could hold managers accountable for internal control deficiencies by cutting their bonuses. Hence, CEOs with high cash compensation may have greater incentive to quickly remedy the disclosed MWs to protect their position, reputation, and bonuses. On the other hand, prior research sug-gests that cash compensation is a proxy for managerial risk tolerance (e.g., Guay, 1999). Ceteris paribus , risk-tolerant managers reap more benefits from their risk-taking activities and are thus more likely to favor ineffective internal con-trol that condones excessive risk-taking. In addition, as bonus plans are often based on accounting results, which are easier to manipulate when internal control is deficient (e.g., Ashbaugh-Skaife et al., 2008), managers may be able to 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 1348 LIU AND LIU 

obtain higher bonuses while internal control deficiencies are not fixed. These opposing forces complicate the direc-tional prediction of the effects of CEO salaries and bonuses on firm promptness in remedying MWs. We also include JOBSECURITY to control for CEO concern over job security. CEO turnover is negatively related to CEO–chairman duality (Lucier, Schuyt, & Handa, 2004; Desai, Hogan, & Wilkins, 2006) and positively related to board of director independence (Huson, Parrino, & Starks, 2001; Laux, 2007). We thus follow Bamber, Jiang, Petroni, and Wang (2010) and measure JOBSECURITY as the sum of two binary variables, DUALITY and BOARDIND . DUALITY takes the value of one if the CEO is also the chairman of the board; BOARDIND is one if the percentage of outside directors is smaller than the sample median. We expect that CEOs who are more concerned about losing their job are more likely to expedite remediation of MWs to secure their position. 29 Prior research indicates that effective boards of directors have a positive effect on the remediation of MWs (e.g., Goh, 2009; Johnstone et al., 2011). Hence, we include a composite measure of board effectiveness, BODEFF , and expect its coefficient to be positive. Three variables are added to control for the effects of external auditors (e.g., Ashbaugh-Skaife, Collins, & Kinney, 2007; Zhang et al., 2007). The first is the ratio of non-audit fees to total fees ( NONAUDFEE ) auditors earned in the remediation year. Non-audit fees could either indicate a lack of auditor independence or represent genuine consulting services auditors provided to help fix internal control problems. Because it is difficult to distinguish between these two possibilities, which have opposite effects on MW remediation, we do not have a directional prediction for the non-audit fee ratio. Second, we include indicator variable BIG to control for any differential monitoring by Big 4 versus non-Big 4 auditors over the remediation period. Prior research, however, does not find differential effect from Big 4 auditors on the remediation of MWs (e.g., Li, Sun, & Ettredge, 2010; Ettredge, Heintz, Li, & Scholz, 2011; Hammersley et al., 2012). Third, we control for auditor change using an indicator variable NEWAUD , which takes the value of one if there is an auditor change between the remediation year and the prior year and zero otherwise. No directional prediction is made for this variable, because it incorporates upward (i.e., non-Big 4 to Big 4), downward (i.e., Big 4 to non-Big 4), and horizontal (i.e., within Big 4/non-Big 4) auditor changes. We control for CFO turnover with indicator variable NEWCFO , which takes the value of one if there is a CFO change between the remediation year and the prior year and zero otherwise. Goh (2009) finds that CFO turnover has a positive effect on MW remediation, whereas Li et al. (2010) and Johnstone et al. (2011) do not find a significant effect on MW remediation from simply hiring new CFOs. Considering the mixed evidence and the fact that newly appointed CFOs need time to settle into their new positions, we do not have an ex ante expectation for a short-term effect from CFO turnover on MW remediation. With respect to firm-specific characteristics, previous studies suggest that firm size, profitability, operating com-plexity, risk, and the severity of MWs could affect MW remediation (e.g., Goh, 2009; Li et al., 2010; Hammersley et al., 2012). We use LNTA (the natural log of a firm’s total assets) to control for firm size and ROA (the ratio of net income to average assets in the remediation year) to control for firm profitability. Although large and profitable firms tend to have more resources to remedy internal control deficiencies, they are likely to have more complex operations, which can complicate the remediation process. As a result, we do not make directional predictions for the effects of firm size and profitability on firm promptness in remedying MWs. We include an indicator variable SEVERITY (coded one for firms with severe MWs) to control for the severity of internal control weaknesses. We determine the severity of each MW based on its description in the firm’s annual reports. Consistent with Moody’s (2004, 2006) and Doyle et al. (2007a), we classify MWs into two categories: account-specific and entity-level. Account-specific MWs are less severe and relate to controls over specific account balances or transaction-level processes (e.g., inadequate controls for bad debts), whereas entity-level MWs indicate severe defi-ciencies and relate to entity-level controls such as control environment or the overall financial reporting process, casting doubt over management’s ability to prepare accurate financial reports and to control the business (e.g., per-vasive ineffective processes). 30 As in Doyle et al. (2007a) and Goh (2009), SEVERITY is one if a firm reports at least one 29 We thank an anonymous reviewer for raising this point. 30 See Doyle et al. (2007a, Appendix B) and Moody’s (2006, Appendix 3) for more illustrations of account-specific versus entity-level MWs. 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License LIU AND LIU 1349 

entity-level MW or three account-specific MWs and zero otherwise. We expect a negative coefficient for SEVERITY , as severe MWs require more resources and greater effort to remedy. The following three variables are used to control for firm operating complexity: TURNOVER (the ratio of sales to average assets in the remediation year), FOREIGN (an indicator variable coded one if a firm is involved in foreign opera-tions during the remediation year and zero otherwise), and MA (an indicator variable coded one if a firm is involved in a merger or acquisition during the remediation year and zero otherwise). We predict a negative coefficient for 

TURNOVER because high turnover involves high levels of inventories and account receivables, which are often asso-ciated with complex internal controls. We predict negative coefficients for FOREIGN and MA because firms engaged in foreign operations or merger activities are likely to face greater complications in remedying internal control weak-nesses. 31 We control for firm risk by including LEV (the ratio of total liabilities to total assets), LOSS (an indicator variable coded one if a firm reports negative net income in the year prior to the remediation year and zero otherwise), and INDRISK (an indicator variable coded one if a firm operates in a litigious industry and zero otherwise). 32 On the one hand, risky firms would benefit more from quick restoration of healthy internal control; on the other hand, lack of resources in financially distressed firms and management risk-seeking incentives could delay resolution of internal control problems. Finally, we use an indicator variable SOX404 to control for the difference between firms that disclosed MWs under SOX 404 versus those that disclosed under SOX 302. 33 Since management’s MW disclosures under SOX 404, but not under SOX 302, involve auditor attestation, we expect more monitoring and advice from auditors during the remedia-tion process for SOX 404 firms and thus a positive coefficient for SOX404 . Appendix B presents all empirical variables used in this study and their definitions. 

3.3.2 Empirical model to test H2 

H2 concerns the oversight role of boards of directors when CEOs are incentivized to seek risk and delay rectification of internal control problems. To test H2, we estimate the following probit model: 

PROMPT i, t +1 = ?? 0 + ?? 1 DELTA i, t + ?? 2 VEGA i, t + ?? 3 VEGA i, t × BODEFF i, t + ?? 4 SALARY i, t + ?? 5 BONUS i, t 

+ ?? 6 JOBSECURITY i, t + ?? 7 BODEFF i, t + ?? 8 DELTA i, t × BODEFF i, t + ?? 9 NONAUDFEE i, t +1 + ?? 10 BIG i, t +1

+ ?? 11 NEWAUD i, t +1 + ?? 12 NEWCFO i, t +1 + ?? 13 LNTA i, t +1 + ?? 14 ROA i, t +1 + ?? 15 SEVERITY i, t 

+ ?? 16 TURNOVER i, t +1 + ?? 17 FOREIGN i, t +1 + ?? 18 MA i, t +1 + ?? 19 LEV i, t +1 + ?? 20 LOSS i, t +1 + ?? 21 INDRISK j

+ ?? 22 SOX 404 i, t +1 + Error Term, (2) where all variables are as defined in Model (1). The overall effect of CEO volatility sensitivity on the remediation of MWs is captured by the function ( ?? 2 + ?? 3BODEFF ), where BODEFF is board effectiveness and varies across firms. H2 predicts that effective boards of directors mitigate the negative effect of CEO volatility sensitivity on MW remediation, which translates to the prediction ?? 3 > 0, that is, a positive coefficient for the interaction term VEGA × BODEFF. 

We include the interaction between board effectiveness and CEO price sensitivity, DELTA × BODEFF , as an additional control variable. Given that both price sensitivity and board effectiveness have positive effects on MW remediation, 31 Hammersley et al. (2012) report that the number of business segments has a negative effect on the remediation of internal control weaknesses. A total of 11.46 percent of our sample firms lack segment information from the Compustat segment file. A sensitivity analysis (untabulated) finds that the results for our test variables remain qualitatively the same after controlling for the number of business segments in the regressions. (The untabulated results are available from the authors upon request.) 32 Consistent with Francis, Philbrick, and Schipper (1994), we regard litigious industries as industries with Standard Industrial Classification codes 2833–2836 (biotechnology), 3570–3577 and 7370–7374 (computers), 3600–3674 (electronics), and 5200–6961 (retailing). Except for the control for industry risk, we do not further include industry fixed effects, because our dependent variable (remediation promptness) lacks variation for 21 industries out of a total of 54 industries in our sample (based on two-digit SIC code). 33 The final sample consists of 23 (300) firms that disclosed MWs for the first time under SOX 302 (SOX 404). The results for our test variables remain quali-tatively the same if we exclude the 23 SOX 302 observations. 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 1350 LIU AND LIU 

it is essentially an empirical question whether these two factors are strategic substitutes (i.e., offsetting each other) or complements (i.e., reinforcing each other) in the sense of Bulow, Geanakoplos, and Klemperer (1985), leading to a non-directional prediction for the coefficient of DELTA × BODEFF .

## 4 EMPIRICAL RESULTS 4.1 Descriptive statistics 

Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for the sample firms. The last column of the table presents results from the t-tests (Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney tests) for the differences in variable means (medians) between firms with prompt remedia-tion of MWs ( PROMPT = 1) versus those without prompt remediation ( PROMPT = 0). There is no significant difference 

TA B L E 2 Descriptive statistics for the full sample and the subsamples with and without prompt remediation of material weaknesses (MWs) in internal control 

Full sample ( n = 323) 

PROMPT = 1(n = 234) 

PROMPT = 0(n = 89) 

PROMPT = 1 versus 

PROMPT = 0Variables Mean Std. Dev. Median Mean Median Mean Median 

t-statistic for difference in means 

z-statistic for difference in medians 

PROMPT 0.724 0.447 1.000 NA NA NA NA NA NA 

DELTA 0.440 1.169 0.127 0.498 0.132 0.289 0.122 1.439 0.723 

VEGA 0.034 0.080 0.013 0.032 0.011 0.038 0.018 -0.671 -2.044 ** 

SALARY 0.484 0.300 0.395 0.486 0.390 0.479 0.416 0.187 -0.889 

BONUS 0.485 1.373 0.152 0.474 0.168 0.512 0.141 -0.223 0.957 

JOBSECURITY 1.096 0.678 1.000 1.068 1.000 1.169 1.000 -1.187 -1.170 

BODEFF 1.610 0.903 2.000 1.718 2.000 1.326 1.000 3.547 *** 3.363 *** 

NONAUDFEE 0.183 0.173 0.131 0.179 0.130 0.194 0.138 -0.718 -0.394 

BIG 0.808 0.394 1.000 0.803 1.000 0.820 0.000 -0.342 -0.342 

NEWAUD 0.207 0.406 0.000 0.188 0.000 0.258 0.000 -1.394 -1.392 

NEWCFO 0.260 0.439 0.000 0.252 0.000 0.281 0.000 -0.525 -0.526 

LNTA 6.325 1.568 6.201 6.351 6.245 6.257 5.856 0.481 0.777 

ROA -0.008 0.162 0.015 -0.004 0.017 -0.020 0.009 0.833 1.363 

SEVERITY 0.353 0.479 0.000 0.222 0.000 0.697 1.000 -8.866 *** -7.959 *** 

TURNOVER 0.922 0.890 0.741 0.854 0.681 1.101 0.905 -2.249 ** -2.363 ** 

FOREIGN 0.257 0.438 0.000 0.201 0.000 0.404 0.000 -3.814 *** -3.736 *** 

MA 0.440 0.497 0.000 0.415 0.000 0.506 1.000 -1.474 -1.471 

LEV 0.533 0.300 0.514 0.523 0.498 0.559 0.520 -0.965 -0.941 

LOSS 0.344 0.476 0.000 0.312 0.000 0.427 0.000 -1.950 * -1.941 *

INDRISK 0.474 0.500 0.000 0.487 0.000 0.438 0.000 0.786 0.786 

SOX404 0.929 0.258 1.000 0.962 1.000 0.843 1.000 3.781 *** 3.705 *** All variables are defined in Appendix B. The full sample consists of 323 firms that disclosed MWs in internal control for the first time at their fiscal year-end between November 15, 2003, and August 27, 2006, among which 234 firms remedied MWs within the remediation year ( PROMPT = 1) and 89 failed to remedy MWs within the remediation year ( PROMPT = 0). The last column of the table reports the results from the t-tests (Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney tests) for the differences in variable means (medians) between firms with prompt remediation of MWs ( PROMPT = 1) and those without prompt remediation ( PROMPT =

0). ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively, based on two-tailed tests. 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License LIU AND LIU 1351 

in mean or median for DELTA between the two groups of firms, providing little support for H1a. In addition, firms with prompt remediation exhibit a significantly lower median, but not a different mean, for VEGA compared with firms with-out prompt remediation, offering partial support for H1b. The lack of univariate results for H1a and, to a lesser extent, H1b is likely attributable to uncontrolled correlated variables. The test variables DELTA and VEGA are significantly cor-related with each other and with the following control variables: CEO salary ( SALARY ), bonus ( BONUS ), and firm size (LNTA ) (see Table 3). It is therefore necessary to employ multivariate analysis to control for correlated variables in test-ing our hypotheses. We also note that firms with prompt remediation of MWs have higher means and medians for BODEFF (board effectiveness) and SOX404 (disclosure under SOX 404) and lower means and medians for SEVERITY (MW severity), 

TURNOVER (turnover ratio), FOREIGN (foreign operation), and LOSS (loss status). These univariate results suggest that prompt remediation of MWs is positively associated with board effectiveness and SOX 404 disclosure and negatively associated with the severity of internal control deficiencies, firm complexity, and firm risk. Table 3 reports Pearson correlations between the independent variables in regressions (1) and (2). The correlation between PROMPT and DELTA is 0.08, and that between PROMPT and VEGA is –0.07, both are marginally significant at the 10% level (one-tailed). These findings provide preliminary evidence for H1a and H1b. The correlation between 

PROMPT and VEGA × BODEFF is positive yet insignificant. Since DELTA , VEGA , and VEGA × BODEFF are significantly correlated with several other control variables, we examine their impact on PROMPT more carefully in regression anal-yses. Most of the pairwise correlations between variables are below 0.50, except for those between DELTA and DELTA ×

BODEFF (0.88), VEGA and VEGA × BODEFF (0.95), SALARY and BONUS (0.58), and SALARY and LNTA (0.60). We discuss the implications of these correlations for our test results later (see footnotes 38 and 40). 

## 4.2 Impact of CEO equity incentives on remediation promptness 

Table 4 reports regression results from Model (1). Column 1 of the table reports coefficient estimates, whereas Column 2 reports average marginal effects of individual variables calculated with all other regression variables held at their sample means. 34 The reported z-/t -statistics (in parentheses) throughout this paper are based on robust stan-dard errors corrected for heteroskedasticity. 35 As the inferences we draw from the coefficient estimates are similar to those from the marginal effects, our discus-sion focuses on the former. As shown in Table 4, Column 1, the coefficient for DELTA is positive and statistically signif-icant (0.491, z = 2.05), which is consistent with H1a and suggests that CEO price sensitivity has a desirable, positive impact on firm promptness in remedying MWs. In contrast, the coefficient for VEGA is negative and statistically signifi-cant (–3.592, z = –2.52), which is consistent with H1b and suggests that CEO volatility sensitivity exerts an undesirable, negative impact on firm promptness in remedying MWs. To gauge the economic significance of the price and volatility sensitivities, we note that a one standard deviation increase in CEO price sensitivity from its mean increases the like-lihood of timely remediation of MWs by 12 percent (with all other regression variables held at their sample means), whereas a similar increase in CEO volatility sensitivity reduces the likelihood of timely remediation by 9 percent. 36 As for monitoring by boards of directors and external auditors, we find that the coefficient for BODEFF is signif-icantly positive (0.344, z = 3.25), which is consistent with Goh (2009) and suggests that effective boards of direc-tors expedite the remediation of MWs. In addition, the coefficient for NONAUDFEE is significantly negative ( -0.902, 34 For a nonlinear probit model, the coefficients are not the same as the marginal effects, which depend on not only the coefficient estimates of the model but also the values of the independent variables. 35 We do not include fiscal year indicators in our main regressions, because the fiscal year in the US varies across firms and including these indicators could lead to misclassifications. A sensitivity test (untabulated) indicates that our main results are robust to including fiscal year indicators. 36 We calculate the change in the predicted probability of a prompt MW remediation when CEO price sensitivity increases one standard deviation from its mean as F[?? 0+?? 1 × ( DELTA = sample mean + one standard deviation) +?20                   

> i=2?? i×Corresponding independent variable at sample mean] minus F[?? 0+?? 1×(DELTA
> =sample mean) +?20
> i=2?? i×Corresponding independent variable at sample mean], where Fis the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal, and
> ?? 0,?? 1, and ?? iare coefficients estimated based on regression (1) that are reported in Column 1, Table 4. Table 2 reports sample mean and standard deviation for regression variables. In addition, moving CEO price sensitivity (volatility sensitivity) from the 1st to the 99th percentile of its distribution leads to an increase (decrease) in the likelihood of the timely remediation of MWs by 26 percent (42 percent). 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

1352 LIU AND LIU 

> TA B L E 3  Pearson correlation matrix for independent variables of regressions
> Variables  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23
> 1 PROMPT
> 2 DELTA  0.08  a3 DELTA  × BODEFF  0.09  0.88
> 4 VEGA  -0.07  a 0.32  0.33
> 5 VEGA  × BODEFF  0.03  0.34  0.40  0.95
> 6 SALARY  0.01  0.38  0.22  0.33  0.32
> 7 BONUS  -0.01  0.31  0.16  0.26  0.19  0.58
> 8 JOBSECURITY  -0.07  0.00  0.03  0.07  0.06  -0.09  0.05 9 BODEFF  0.19  0.04  0.20  0.07  0.22  0.00  -0.06  -0.12
> 10  NONAUDFEE  -0.04  0.01  0.03  0.02  0.03  -0.01  0.06  -0.10  0.04 11  BIG  -0.02  0.09  0.08  0.13  0.12  0.26  0.11  0.03  -0.00  0.05 12  NEWAUD  -0.08  0.03  -0.02  -0.12  -0.11  -0.12  -0.06  -0.02  0.02  -0.03  -0.25
> 13  NEWCFO  -0.03  -0.02  -0.02  0.01  0.03  -0.01  -0.03  -0.02  0.08  0.03  0.07  0.04 14  LNTA  0.03  0.26  0.17  0.28  0.23  0.60  0.36  -0.18  -0.12  0.03  0.30  -0.11  0.01 15  ROA  0.05  0.13  0.10  0.11  0.09  0.11  0.09  0.06  -0.06  -0.04  0.10  -0.11  -0.07  0.24
> 16  SEVERITY  -0.44  -0.01  0.00  0.01  0.01  -0.05  -0.02  0.09  -0.02  -0.07  -0.00  0.07  0.11  -0.06  -0.01 17  TURNOVER  -0.12  -0.01  0.03  0.12  0.17  0.09  0.01  0.10  0.11  0.02  0.09  -0.08  0.05  -0.12  0.12  0.05 18  FOREIGN  -0.21  -0.00  0.00  0.01  0.00  0.04  0.03  0.06  -0.11  0.03  0.16  0.03  -0.03  0.01  0.04  0.05  0.11 19  MA  -0.08  -0.07  -0.08  -0.05  -0.07  0.07  -0.00  -0.04  -0.03  0.02  -0.03  0.04  0.11  0.17  0.07  -0.00  -0.12  -0.04 20  LEV  -0.05  -0.02  -0.06  0.01  -0.02  0.30  0.12  -0.15  -0.12  -0.02  -0.03  0.01  -0.01  0.47  -0.06  -0.06  0.00  -0.06  0.08 21  LOSS  -0.11  -0.09  -0.11  -0.09  -0.10  -0.02  -0.08  0.04  -0.05  -0.11  -0.09  0.06  0.11  -0.19  -0.43  0.12  -0.00  0.02  -0.12  0.09 22  INDRISK  0.04  0.04  0.04  0.12  0.08  -0.08  -0.01  0.04  -0.03  -0.02  -0.01  0.02  0.09  0.09  -0.09  0.01  -0.20  -0.15  0.05  0.04  -0.05 23  SOX404  0.21  0.03  0.04  -0.05  -0.02  -0.09  0.00  0.07  0.09  -0.04  -0.04  -0.04  -0.06  -0.07  0.02  -0.10  -0.04  -0.17  0.03  -0.17  -0.03  -0.00 All variables are defined in Appendix B. The Pearson correlation coefficients are highlighted in bold (italic) if they are significant at the 1% (5%) level based on two-tailed tests;  a denotes 10% significant based on one-tailed test. 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

LIU AND LIU 1353 

TA B L E 4 CEO equity incentives and the remediation of material weaknesses in internal control 

Dependent variable PROMPT 

Column (1) Column (2) Variable Predicted sign Coefficient ( z-statistic) Marginal effect ( z-statistic) Test variables (hypotheses) 

DELTA (H1a) + 0.491 ** 0.135 ** (2.05) (2.16) 

VEGA (H1b) - -3.592 *** -0.990 *** (-2.52) (-2.64) 

Control variables 

SALARY ? 0.440 0.121 (1.02) (1.01) 

BONUS ? -0.094 -0.026 (-1.58) (-1.60) 

JOBSECURITY - -0.060 -0.017 (-0.45) (-0.45) 

BODEFF + 0.344 *** 0.095 *** (3.25) (3.29) 

NONAUDFEE ? -0.902 * -0.248 *(-1.80) (-1.79) 

BIG ? -0.093 -0.026 (-0.36) (-0.36) 

NEWAUD ? -0.197 -0.054 (-0.90) (-0.90) 

NEWCFO ? 0.091 0.025 (0.46) (0.46) 

LNTA ? -0.004 -0.001 (-0.05) (-0.05) 

ROA ? 0.691 0.190 (1.26) (1.28) 

SEVERITY - -1.494 *** -0.412 *** (-8.36) (-7.76) 

TURNOVER - -0.296 *** -0.082 *** (-2.39) (-2.39) 

FOREIGN - -0.537 *** -0.148 *** (-2.53) (-2.49) 

MA - -0.423 ** -0.117 ** (-2.25) (-2.28) 

LEV ? -0.350 -0.097 (-1.07) (-1.06) 

LOSS ? 0.010 0.003 (0.05) (0.05) (Continues) 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 1354 LIU AND LIU 

TA B L E 4 (Continued) 

Dependent variable PROMPT 

Column (1) Column (2) Variable Predicted sign Coefficient ( z-statistic) Marginal effect ( z-statistic) 

INDRISK ? 0.162 0.045 (0.84) (0.84) 

SOX404 + 0.598 ** 0.165 ** (1.83) (1.82) Intercept 1.073 (1.64) Pseudo R2 31.41% No. of observations 323 Columns (1) and (2) report coefficient estimates and marginal effects for Model (1) below: 

PROMPT i, t +1 = ?? 0 + ?? 1 DELTA i, t + ?? 2 VEGA i, t + ?? 3 SALARY i, t + ?? 4 BONUS i, t + ?? 5 JOBSECURITY i, t + ?? 6 BODEFF i, t 

+ ?? 7 NONAUDFEE i, t +1 + ?? 8 BIG i, t +1 + ?? 9 NEWAUD i, t +1 + ?? 10 NEWCFO i, t +1 + ?? 11 LNTA i, t +1 + ?? 12 ROA i, t +1

+ ?? 13 SEVERITY i, t + ?? 14 TURNOVER i, t +1 + ?? 15 FOREIGN i, t +1 + ?? 16 MA i, t +1 + ?? 17 LEV i, t +1 + ?? 18 LOSS i, t +1

+ ?? 19 INDRISK j + ?? 20 SOX 404 i, t +1 + Error Term, PROMPT equals 1 if a firm remedies material weaknesses (MWs) in internal control in the fiscal year following their initial disclosure, 0 otherwise. All other variables are defined in Appendix B. The sample contains 323 firms that disclosed MWs for the first time at their fiscal year-end between November 15, 2003, and August 27, 2006. ***, **, and * indicate one-tailed (two-tailed) significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively, for variables with predicted (unpredicted) signs. 

z = - 1.80), which implies that a close economic bond between auditors and clients, as reflected by high non-audit fee ratios, may prevent auditors from effectively monitoring the remediation process. Regarding firm-specific characteristics, the coefficient for SEVERITY is significantly negative (–1.494, z = –8.36), which is consistent with Goh (2009) and Hammersley et al. (2012) and suggests that firms require more time to rem-edy severe MWs. Moreover, the coefficients for TURNOVER , FOREIGN , and MA show the predicted signs with statistical significance, indicating that firms with more complex operations, as reflected by high turnover ratios or engagement in foreign operations or merger activities, are less likely to fix internal control deficiencies promptly. Finally, the coefficient for SOX404 is significantly positive (0.598, z = 1.83). This coefficient is consistent with our expectation that early auditor involvement in attesting management’s internal control assessment is likely to facilitate the remediation of MWs by virtue of auditor monitoring and consultation. 

## 4.3 Impact of board oversight on CEO incentives to delay the remediation of MWs 

Table 5 presents regression results from Model (2). Based on H2, we expect a positive coefficient for the interaction term VEGA × BODEFF . As shown in Table 5, the coefficient and marginal effect for DELTA (VEGA ) are significantly positive (negative). More importantly, consistent with H2, the coefficient for VEGA × BODEFF , as well as its marginal effect, 37 is positive and statistically significant (5.622, z = 2.38). 38 This result, together with the result on VEGA in 37 Note that the marginal effect for the interaction term indicates the average marginal effect of BODEFF on the marginal effect of VEGA (i.e., the cross-partial derivative of the probability of prompt remediation with respect to VEGA and BODEFF ) when all other regression variables are held at their sample means and is calculated using the methods suggested by Norton, Wang, and Ai (2004) and Berger and Bouwman (2013, fn 20). 38 Although the correlation between VEGA and VEGA ×BODEFF is 0.95 (see Table 3), this high correlation is not harmful, because the coefficients for both 

VEGA and VEGA ×BODEFF are statistically significant. The major concern with multicollinearity is that it biases against finding significant results because the correlation between independent variables inflates the standard errors of the estimators. Thus, as Belsley (1991, p. 73) points out, if researchers can obtain significant statistics despite the presence of collinearity, then collinearity has caused no harm. Nonetheless, by separately including VEGA and VEGA ×BODEFF 

in Model (2), our conclusions remain unchanged. 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License LIU AND LIU 1355 

TA B L E 5 Impact of board effectiveness on CEO vega incentive to delay the remediation of material weaknesses (MWs) in internal control 

Dependent variable PROMPT 

Column (1) Column (2) Variable Predicted sign Coefficient ( z-statistic) Marginal effect ( z-statistic) Test variables (hypotheses) 

DELTA + 0.791 ** 0.218 ** (1.95) (1.98) 

VEGA - -13.814 *** -3.797 *** (-3.16) (-3.11) 

VEGA × BODEFF (H2) + 5.622 *** 1.545 *** (2.38) (2.34) 

Control variables 

DELTA × BODEFF ? -0.214 -0.059 (-1.12) (-1.11) 

BODEFF + 0.258 ** 0.071 ** (2.14) (2.17) Other control variables Included Intercept 1.160 *(1.72) Pseudo R2 32.60% No. of observations 323 Columns (1) and (2) report coefficient estimates and marginal effects for Model (2) below: 

PROMPT i, t +1 = ?? 0 + ?? 1 DELTA i, t + ?? 2 VEGA i, t + ?? 3 VEGA i, t × BODEFF i, t + ?? 4 SALARY i, t + ?? 5 BONUS i, t + ?? 6 JOBSECURITY i, t 

+ ?? 7 BODEFF i, t + ?? 8 DELTA i, t × BODEFF i, t + ?? 9 NONAUDFEE i, t +1 + ?? 10 BIG i, t +1 + ?? 11 NEWAUD i, t +1

+ ?? 12 NEWCFO i, t +1 + ?? 13 LNTA i, t +1 + ?? 14 ROA i, t +1 + ?? 15 SEVERITY i, t + ?? 16 TURNOVER i, t +1 + ?? 17 FOREIGN i, t +1

+ ?? 18 MA i, t +1 + ?? 19 LEV i, t +1 + ?? 20 LOSS i, t +1 + ?? 21 INDRISK j + ?? 22 SOX 404 i, t +1 + Error Term, PROMPT equals 1 if a firm remedies MWs in internal control in the fiscal year following their initial disclosure, 0 otherwise. All other variables are defined in Appendix B. The sample contains 323 firms that disclosed MWs for the first time at their fiscal year-end between November 15, 2003, and August 27, 2006. ***, **, and * indicate one-tailed (two-tailed) significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively, for variables with predicted (unpredicted) signs. Table 4, suggests that the undesirable, negative effect of CEO volatility sensitivity on the remediation of MWs weakens as boards of directors become more effective. That is, when CEOs are reluctant to fix internal control deficiencies due to the risk-seeking incentive induced by their option holdings, effective boards can play an oversight role by deterring such undesirable behavior. 39 Turning to the control variables, we find that the coefficient and marginal effect for DELTA × BODEFF are insignifi-cant. 40 This evidence suggests that board effectiveness does not influence the marginal effect of CEO price sensitivity on remediation promptness, given that price sensitivity provides the ‘correct’ incentive for managers to remedy inter-nal control deficiencies. The results for other control variables are consistent with those reported in Table 4. 39 Our conclusion for H2 remains unchanged after including additional controls of CFO equity incentives, changes in CEO equity incentives during the reme-diation period, or both. 40 It is possible that the insignificant result for DELTA × BODEFF is due to collinearity, as the correlation between DELTA and DELTA × BODEFF is as high as 0.88 (see Table 3). To address this issue, we include DELTA and DELTA × BODEFF separately, one at a time, in Model (2). The coefficient and marginal effect for DELTA 

(DELTA × BODEFF ) remain significantly positive (insignificant) under this treatment, which suggests that the insignificant result for DELTA × BODEFF is unlikely to be due to collinearity. 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 1356 LIU AND LIU 

## 5 FURTHER ANALYSES 

We perform several additional analyses to check the robustness of our results with respect to alternative empirical measures, model specifications, and potential omitted variables. 

## 5.1 Alternative measures 5.1.1 Alternative measures of CEO equity incentives 

We first check whether our results are robust to the use of alternative measures of CEO price and volatility sensi-tivities, denoted DELTA ' and VEGA ', respectively. Following Bergstresser and Philippon (2006) and Kim, Li, and Zhang (2011a), we calculate DELTA ' (VEGA ') by scaling DELTA (VEGA ) by the sum of DELTA (VEGA ) and CEO salary and bonus. We re-run probit regressions (1) and (2) on DELTA ' and VEGA ', with SALARY and BONUS excluded. The results (untabu-lated) are consistent with our previous results reported in Tables 4 and 5 and provide further support to our predictions of H1 and H2. Moreover, due to limited liability, stock payoffs are also convex, making stock portfolio value sensitive to stock return volatility. However, Guay (1999) pointed out that ‘Convexity provided by common stock, on the other hand, is several orders of magnitude lower than that of stock options, and is of little economic importance.’ We thus follow prior studies (e.g., Knopf et al., 2002; Rajgopal & Shevlin, 2002; Low, 2009) and focus on volatility sensitivity provided by stock options in our main analyses. Nonetheless, we recalculate volatility sensitivity using both CEO stock and option holdings as a robustness check. Our results (untabulated) remain qualitatively the same. 

5.1.2 Standardized value of continuous variables 

We also replicate our results using standardized values of all continuous variables. To standardize a continuous vari-able, we divide the difference between its raw value and sample mean by its standard deviation, resulting in a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. Table 6 reports the regression results. Columns 1 and 2, and 3 and 4 report the coefficients and marginal effects for regression Models (1) and (2), respectively. We denote the standardized values of each continuous variable by adding a prefix S. The coefficients and marginal effects are consistent with the results reported in Tables 4 and 5 and lend further credence to our predictions for H1 and H2. 

## 5.2 CEO versus CFO equity incentives 

Prior research provides mixed evidence on differences in the equity incentives of CEOs versus CFOs (e.g., Chava & Purnanandam, 2010; Jiang et al., 2010; Feng, Ge, Luo, & Shevlin, 2011; Kim et al., 2011a; Kobelsky et al., 2013; Bal-sam et al., 2014). For example, Jiang et al. (2010) find that CFO equity incentives play a more prominent role in earn-ings management than those of CEOs. However, Feng et al. (2011) argue that CFOs engage in accounting manipulation because they succumb to pressure from CEOs rather than seek immediate personal benefits from their equity compen-sation. Kobelsky et al. (2013) and Balsam et al. (2014) find that CFO, but not CEO, price sensitivity has a significantly negative association with the existence/disclosure of MWs in internal control. We examine the role of CEOs in rectifying internal control weaknesses because CEOs assume the highest statutory duty for the establishment of effective internal control and oversee the control activities of divisional managers in an organization, including CFOs (COSO, 2011, paras 424 and 427). Moreover, many disclosed MWs in internal control are at the firm level or involve non-financial units of the firm and thus go beyond the responsibility of a CFO, such as an ineffective control environment, management override, and weak technology and data access controls (Moody’s, 2006). We recognize that CFOs also play an important role in maintaining effective internal control, especially for control activities that relate directly to the functions of the financial unit and fall within the CFO’s domain, such as control of inventory accounting, application of complex accounting standards, and procedures for separation of duties 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License LIU AND LIU 1357 

TA B L E 6 Using standardized values of all continuous variables 

Dependent variable PROMPT 

Column (1) Column (2) Column (3) Column (4) Variable Predicted sign Coefficient (z-statistic) Marginal effect (z-statistic) Coefficient (z-statistic) Marginal effect (z-statistic) Test variables 

SDELTA + 0.574 ** 0.158 ** 0.925 ** 0.254 ** (2.05) (2.16) (1.95) (1.98) 

SVEGA - -0.287 *** -0.079 *** -1.105 *** -0.304 *** (-2.52) (-2.64) (-3.16) (-3.11) 

SVEGA × BODEFF + NA NA 0.450 *** 0.124 *** (2.38) (2.34) 

Control variables 

SSALARY ? 0.132 0.036 0.143 0.039 (1.02) (1.01) (1.03) (1.03) 

SBONUS ? -0.130 -0.036 -0.124 -0.034 (-1.58) (-1.60) (-1.35) (-1.37) 

JOBSECURITY - -0.060 -0.017 -0.097 -0.027 (-0.45) (-0.45) (-0.70) (-0.70) 

BODEFF + 0.344 *** 0.095 *** 0.352 *** 0.097 *** (3.25) (3.29) (3.23) (3.25) 

SDELTA × BODEFF ? NA NA -0.250 -0.069 (-1.12) (-1.11) 

SNONAUDFEE ? -0.156 * -0.043 * -0.146 * -0.040 *(-1.80) (-1.79) (-1.68) (-1.68) 

BIG ? -0.093 -0.026 -0.078 -0.021 (-0.36) (-0.36) (-0.30) (-0.30) 

NEWAUD ? -0.197 -0.054 -0.190 -0.052 (-0.90) (-0.90) (-0.89) (-0.89) 

NEWCFO ? 0.091 0.025 0.059 0.016 (0.46) (0.46) (0.30) (0.30) 

SLNTA ? -0.006 -0.002 0.001 0.001 (-0.05) (-0.05) (0.01) (0.01) 

SROA ? 0.112 0.031 0.127 0.035 (1.26) (1.28) (1.43) (1.45) 

SEVERITY - -1.494 *** -0.412 *** -1.489 *** -0.409 *** (-8.36) (-7.76) (-8.23) (-7.76) 

STURNOVER - -0.264 *** -0.073 *** -0.280 *** -0.077 *** (-2.39) (-2.39) (-2.50) (-2.51) 

FOREIGN - -0.537 *** -0.148 *** -0.550 *** -0.151 *** (-2.53) (-2.49) (-2.61) (-2.55) (Continues) 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 1358 LIU AND LIU 

TA B L E 6 (Continued) 

Dependent variable PROMPT 

Column (1) Column (2) Column (3) Column (4) Variable Predicted sign Coefficient (z-statistic) Marginal effect (z-statistic) Coefficient (z-statistic) Marginal effect (z-statistic) 

MA - -0.423 ** -0.117 ** -0.425 ** -0.117 ** (-2.25) (-2.28) (-2.26) (-2.30) 

SLEV ? -0.105 -0.029 -0.080 -0.022 (-1.07) (-1.06) (-0.76) (-0.75) 

LOSS ? 0.010 0.003 0.054 0.015 (0.05) (0.05) (0.25) (0.25) 

INDRISK ? 0.162 0.045 0.199 0.055 (0.84) (0.84) (1.01) (1.00) 

SOX404 + 0.598 ** 0.165 ** 0.612 ** 0.168 ** (1.83) (1.82) (1.79) (1.79) Intercept 0.681 0.643 (1.46) (1.33) Pseudo R2 31.41% 32.60% No. of observations 323 323 Columns (1) and (2) [(3) and (4)] report coefficient estimates and marginal effects, respectively, for Model (1) [Model (2)] using standardized values of all continuous variables. For each continuous variable, we scale the difference between its raw value and sample mean by its standard deviation. We denote the standardized values of each continuous variable by adding a prefix 

S. PROMPT equals 1 if a firm remedies material weaknesses (MWs) in internal control in the fiscal year following their initial disclosure, 0 otherwise. All other variables are defined in Appendix B. The sample contains 323 firms that disclosed MWs for the first time at their fiscal year-end between November 15, 2003, and August 27, 2006. ***, **, and * indicate one-tailed (two-tailed) significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively, for variables with predicted (unpredicted) signs. (Moody’s, 2006). In this sub-section, we examine the potential difference between CEO and CFO equity incentives in the remediation of internal control weaknesses. Prior to 2006, firms were not required to disclose compensation information for their CFOs, unless the CFO was among the top five highest-paid executives. After excluding from our main sample the firms that experienced CFO turnover or lack information on CFO compensation, we have a subsample of 193 firms for the joint CEO and CFO analysis. We modify regression (1) to include four additional variables relating to CFO compensation: DELTA_CFO 

(CFO price sensitivity), VEGA_CFO (CFO volatility sensitivity), SALARY_CFO (CFO salary), and BONUS_CFO (CFO bonus). We then run the modified regression on the reduced sample of 193 firms and report the results in Table 7. As shown in Table 7, consistent with our previous result for CEO price sensitivity, the coefficient for DELTA remains significantly positive (1.20, z = 1.75). The coefficient for DELTA_CFO is positive but insignificant, with p-value of 0.15 based on a one-tailed test. Caution should be exercised in interpreting the insignificant result for CFO delta, as the low statistical significance could be due to the small size of the reduced sample. The Wald test comparing the difference in coefficients (as reported in the last two rows of Table 7) does not indicate significant difference in the effects of delta between CEOs and CFOs. Regarding volatility sensitivity, the coefficients for both VEGA and VEGA_CFO are significantly negative. More-over, the result from the Wald test suggests that the coefficient for VEGA_CFO is more negative than that of VEGA .These results suggest that the volatility sensitivity for both CEOs and CFOs has negative effects on remediation promptness and that the undesirable, negative effect of volatility sensitivity appears more severe for CFOs than for CEOs. 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License LIU AND LIU 1359 

TA B L E 7 CEO versus CFO equity incentives in the remediation of material weaknesses (MWs) in internal control 

Dependent variable PROMPT 

Column (1) Column (2) Variable Predicted sign Coefficient (z-statistic) Marginal effect (z-statistic) Test variables 

DELTA + 1.248 ** 0.244 *** (1.76) (2.40) 

DELTA_CFO + 4.406 0.863 (1.18) (1.10) 

VEGA - -11.459 *** -2.244 *** (-2.72) (-2.94) 

VEGA_CFO - -51.324 *** -10.053 ** (-2.60) (-2.27) 

Control variables 

SALARY ? 0.813 0.159 (0.92) (0.87) 

SALARY_CFO ? 2.677 0.524 (1.31) (1.38) 

BONUS ? -0.800 ** -0.157 ** (-2.47) (-2.18) 

BONUS_CFO ? 2.970 *** 0.582 ** (2.79) (2.48) Other control variables Included Intercept 0.576 (0.66) Pseudo R2 40.91% No. of observations 193 

Wald tests for differences in coefficients ?? 2 (p-value) 

Test of difference between coefficients for DELTA and DELTA_CFO 0.62(0.432) Test of difference between coefficients for VEGA and VEGA_CFO 3.46 ** (0.063) Columns (1) and (2) report coefficient estimates and marginal effects, respectively, for Model (1) with CFO compensation vari-ables added to the regression. PROMPT equals 1 if a firm remedies MWs in internal control in the fiscal year following their initial disclosure, 0 otherwise. All other variables are defined in Appendix B. The sample contains 193 firms that disclosed MWs for the first time at their fiscal year-end between November 15, 2003, and August 27, 2006 without CFO turnover and with information available for both CEO and CFO compensation. For results from the probit regression, ***, **, and * indicate one-tailed (two-tailed) significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively, for variables with predicted (unpredicted) signs. In the last two rows of the table, Wald tests are employed to test the differences between the coefficients for CEO and CFO equity incentives. For results from the Wald tests, * indicates two-tailed significance at the 10% level. The results for control variables are generally consistent with the earlier results shown in Table 4, except for the coefficient for CFO bonus. Interestingly, in contrast to the negative effect of CEO bonus, CFO bonus has a positive effect on MW remediation, suggesting that CFOs are more likely to be subject to bonus-based penalties if firms fail to rectify internal control deficiencies in a timely manner. This is probably due to the board’s perception that CFOs are more accountable than CEOs for internal control problems. 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 1360 LIU AND LIU 

## 5.3 Control for changes in CEO delta and vega 

In their supplemental analysis, Balsam et al. (2014, Table 7) report that the change in managers’ price sensitivity (delta) between the beginning and end of the remediation year, but not the ex ante level of delta, is positively related to the remediation of MWs. 41 This evidence implies that ex post delta plays a role as ex ante incentives. However, incentives, by definition, precede actions to help decision-makers evaluate alternative actions. As is commonplace in the literature (e.g., Rajgopal & Shevlin, 2002; Coles et al., 2006; Armstrong et al., 2013), we use ex ante delta and vega as proxies for managerial incentives in our regressions. The change in delta is likely an ex post outcome of a chosen action rather than the ex ante incentive for decision-making. In this regard, note that firm share price, one of the determinants of delta, might stop decreasing (decrease further) as a result of the remediation of (the failure to remedy) the disclosed MWs. Nevertheless, we provide evidence that our results are robust after controlling for changes in CEO delta and vega. Specifically, we re-run Models (1) and (2) using 302 firms with available information on changes in CEO price and volatil-ity sensitivities (i.e., ?DELTA and ?VEGA ). We find that our results (untabulated) for H1 and H2 remain unchanged, 42,43 and the coefficients for ?DELTA and ?VEGA are insignificant in both models. 

## 5.4 CEO option exercised during MW remediation 

If fixing MWs eliminates a portion of favorable upper-tail outcomes for the firm and reduces the value of CEOs’ option holdings, CEOs may have an incentive to cash in some of their options at a higher value by delaying MW remedia-tion. We examine this possibility by regressing CEO option exercised during MW remediation ( OPTVALUE ) on firm remediation promptness ( PROMPT ). Following Bergstresser and Philippon (2004), we denote CEO option exercise by 

OPTVALUE , measured as the value realized from CEOs’ exercised options scaled by firm equity market value. Informa-tion on exercised options is obtained from ExecuComp or manually collected from the EDGAR database. We include in our regression a set of controls suggested by prior literature, including board effectiveness ( BODEFF ), Big 4 audit firm ( BIG ), firm-specific characteristics ( LNTA , ROA , SEVERITY , TURNOVER , FOREIGN , LEV , LOSS , INDRISK ) and SOX 404 indicator ( SOX404 ) (see also Appendix B). Our results (untabulated) show a significantly negative coefficient for PROMPT (–0.059, t = –2.51), suggesting that CEOs who delay MW remediation are more likely to exercise their options than CEOs who timely remedy MWs. More-over, we find that the negative association between OPTVALUE and PROMPT is more pronounced when options consti-tute a larger percentage of CEO compensation (i.e., when the value of VEGA is greater than the sample median). These findings further corroborate our argument for H1b. 

## 5.5 Partitioning analysis based on the percentage of CEO option-based compensation 

We further examine whether the impact from CEO volatility sensitivity ( VEGA ) is more pronounced when options com-prise a larger percentage of CEO payment. Specifically, we partition the sample based on the median value of the per-centage of CEO option-based compensation. We then re-run regressions (1) and (2) using the above subsamples. The results (untabulated) for H1a and H1b are confirmed for firms with high option pay, but not for those with low option pay. As for H2, the coefficients for VEGA and VEGA × BODEFF are statistically significant with predicted signs in the high but not low option pay group; the coefficients for DELTA are insignificant, though with predicted signs, in both subsamples. These results suggest that the negative impact from VEGA on PROMPT is more pronounced when options 41 The delta at the beginning of the remediation year, before a remediation action is taken, is referred to as ex ante delta. 42 The correlation coefficients among DELTA , VEGA , ?DELTA and ?VEGA are well below 0.52, suggesting multicollinearity is not likely to be a concern in the regression. 43 Our sample differs from the sample used in the remediation analysis of Balsam et al. (2014). Our sample consists of firms that disclosed MWs for the first time at fiscal year-end between November 2003 and August 2006, whereas their sample consists of firms that disclosed MWs in 2004. While their sample does not exclude firms that might have disclosed MWs once or multiple times prior to the start of the sample period, we exclude such firms to facilitate causal analysis and to ensure that all firms have the same one-year remediation time. 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License LIU AND LIU 1361 

constitute a larger proportion of CEO annual payment. Therefore, when options dominate CEO compensation, volatil-ity sensitivity and associated risk-taking incentives may cause CEOs to favor ineffective internal controls. 

## 5.6 Robustness check on sample period 

The sample used in our main analyses is restricted to the AS2 period to avoid any confounding effects following the transition to AS5. For robustness purposes, we extend our sample to include MWs disclosed before January 1, 2008. AS5 became effective from November 2007 (with early adoptions allowed from August 2007). Hence, for regular (early) AS5 adopters who disclosed MWs after November 2006 (August 2006), their subsequent evaluation of internal control were prepared by auditors under AS5. We re-examine H1 and H2 using the above enlarged sample. Our results (untabulated) remain qualitatively the same, suggesting that what we learn from the AS2 setting still applies to AS5 and partially alleviates the concern of generalizability. 

## 5.7 Potential omitted correlated variables 

Our results on the relation between price and volatility sensitivities (delta and vega) and remediation promptness would suffer a bias if we were to fail to control for a variable that is both correlated with CEO pre-disclosure compen-sation and that affects CEO post-disclosure remediation behavior for reasons unrelated to compensation. To address this concern, we perform the following analyses. First, we adopt an instrumental variable estimation approach to account for the potential endogenous nature of CEO equity incentives. We adopt two instruments for equity incentives that are unlikely to exert a direct effect on remediation of MWs, but could have an indirect relationship through their effects on equity incentives (e.g., Core & Guay, 1999; Armstrong & Vashishtha, 2012). The first instrument is IVCASH , measured as the amount of cash and short-term investment scaled by beginning of year total assets. On the one hand, cash-constrained firms tend to use equity incentives as substitutes for cash compensation (Core & Guay, 1999). On the other hand, agency problems are more pronounced in firms with greater cash balance (Jensen, 1986), which may in turn motivate the use of equity payments (Garvey, 1997). The second instrument is a firm’s marginal tax rate ( IVTAX ), measured as an indicator variable that equals one if a firm has a tax-loss carry-forward in any of the past three years and zero otherwise. According to Core and Guay (1999), equity-based compensation is expected to be less costly for firms with lower marginal tax rates. Panels A and B of Table 8 report the first- and second-stage regression results. In the first-stage regression, the instrumental variables IVCASH and IVTAX are statistically significant. In the second-stage, we regress PROMPT on pre-dicted values of DELTA , VEGA and their interactions with board effectiveness, denoted as DELTA ", VEGA ", DELTA " ×

BODEFF , and VEGA " × BODEFF . Columns 1 and 2 of Panel B report the regression results for H1 and H2, respectively, which are consistent with our previous findings reported in Tables 4 and 5. It is also possible that certain board characteristics are associated with variations in pre-disclosure delta or vega and that our control for board characteristics is inadequate. If this is true, then the omitted variable for board characteris-tics could affect our results for delta or vega. To alleviate this concern, we expand our control for board characteristics by replacing the composite measure of board effectiveness in Model (1) with individual board characteristics, including audit committee size, audit committee financial expertise, and board independence. Our results (untabulated) for delta and vega remain qualitatively unchanged using the expanded model, suggesting that our results are not likely driven by inadequate control for board characteristics. Another potential omitted correlated variable is managerial risk preference. We try to control for managerial risk aversion by including CEO age and gender, in addition to cash compensation and job security concern, in Model (1) (e.g., Powell & Ansic, 1997; Halek & Eisenhauer, 2001). Our results (untabulated) are robust to including these additional controls. Moreover, optimal compensation design suggests that managers with greater risk aversion will be afforded high vega to counteract this risk aversion, for the benefit of diversified outside shareholders (Jensen & Meckling, 1976). If this is the case and if managerial risk aversion were the reason behind prompt remediation of MWs, then we would 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 1362 LIU AND LIU 

TA B L E 8 Instrumental variable estimation 

Panel A: First-stage regression Dependent variable DELTA VEGA 

Column (1) Column (2) Variables Coefficient (t-statistic) Coefficient (t-statistic) 

IVCASH 0.005 ** 0.001 *** (2.40) (3.33) 

IVTAX 0.290 ** 0.009 *(2.24) (1.82) 

SALARY 1.275 0.030 (1.23) (1.50) 

BONUS 0.069 0.003 (1.03) (1.21) 

BODEFF 0.046 0.005 ** (0.50) (2.04) 

NONAUDFEE 0.188 0.010 (0.81) (0.80) 

BIG -0.091 -0.007 (-0.89) (-1.62) 

NEWAUD 0.275 -0.011 ** (1.19) (-2.65) 

NEWCFO -0.002 0.001 (-0.02) (0.16) 

LNTA 0.100 0.012 *** (1.01) (3.21) 

ROA 0.622 -0.008 (1.25) (-0.76) 

SEVERITY 0.004 0.002 (0.04) (0.43) 

TURNOVER -0.064 0.008 ** (-0.74) (2.65) 

FOREIGN -0.122 0.002 (-0.84) (0.30) 

MA -0.268 ** -0.005 (-2.26) (-1.00) 

LEV -0.389 ** -0.019 *(-2.14) (-1.79) 

LOSS -0.159 -0.007 (-1.22) (-1.21) 

INDRISK 0.099 0.012 *** (1.03) (2.89) 

SOX404 0.155 -0.018 *(1.03) (-1.90) 

JOBSECURITY 0.051 0.005 (0.655) (1.27) Intercept -1.0089 ** -0.1074 *** (-2.48) (-3.34) No. of observations 323 323 Adjusted R2 19.14% 32.51% (Continues) 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License LIU AND LIU 1363 

TA B L E 8 (Continued) 

Panel B: Second-stage regression H1 H2 Dependent variable PROMPT 

Column (1) Column (2) Test variables Predicted sign Coefficient (z-statistic) Coefficient (z-statistic) 

DELTA " + 1.167 ** 1.545 ** (1.65) (1.68) 

VEGA " - -16.173 ** -39.706 ** (-2.07) (-2.25) 

VEGA " × BODEFF + NA 1.100 ** (1.74) 

BODEFF 

Control variables Included No. of observations 323 323 Wald Chi 2 65.24 *** 68.05 *** Panel A of Table 8 reports the first-stage regression results of instrumental variable estimation. ***, **, and * indicate two-tailed significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively, for all variables in Panel A. Columns (1) and (2) of Panel B report second-stage regression results for H1 and H2. For brevity, control variables and intercept are omitted. PROMPT equals 1 if a firm remedies MWs in internal control in the fiscal year following their initial disclosure, 0 otherwise. DELTA " and VEGA " are predicted values of DELTA and VEGA obtained from the first stage. All other variables are defined in Appendix B. The sample contains 323 firms that disclosed MWs for the first time at their fiscal year-end between November 15, 2003, and August 27, 2006. ***, **, and * indicate one-tailed (two-tailed) significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively, for variables with predicted (unpredicted) signs in Panel B. have found a positive relation between vega and remediation promptness. The fact that we find the opposite suggests that our results are unlikely to be explained by unobservable risk preferences. Finally, it is worth noting that H1a and H1b hold opposite predictions for the effects of delta and vega on remedia-tion promptness. This further alleviates the concern that unobservable factors are behind our results. It is unlikely that a variable would simultaneously induce a positive relation between delta and remediation promptness and a negative relation between vega and remediation promptness. 

## 6 CONCLUSIONS 

This study examines a unique research setting in which managers are motivated to remedy MWs in internal control following their initial disclosure mandated by SOX. Using this quasi-experimental research setting, we attempt to iden-tify a casual relation, rather than just a correlation, between managers’ equity incentives and remediation behavior, thereby providing insights into the equity costs, net of any equity benefits, managers would face for adopting ineffec-tive internal controls under the more transparent, post-SOX disclosure regime. Our results concerning the opposite effects from CEO price and volatility sensitivities on the remediation of inter-nal control weaknesses contribute to three streams of the literature: the remediation of internal control weaknesses following implementation of SOX (e.g., Goh, 2009; Li et al., 2010; Johnstone et al., 2011; Balsam et al., 2014); differ-ential incentives embedded in stock- and option-based compensation plans (e.g., Knopf et al., 2002; Armstrong et al., 2013); and the economic implications of SOX (e.g., Cohen et al., 2008; Wang, 2010). Our evidence on CEO price sensi-tivity suggests that the new disclosure regulation provides a channel for stock-based compensation to discipline CEOs in establishing and maintaining healthy firm internal controls in the post-SOX era. On the other hand, when options dominate CEO compensation, volatility sensitivity and associated risk-taking incentives may cause CEOs to favor 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 1364 LIU AND LIU 

ineffective internal controls. We also find that the undesirable, negative effect of CEO volatility sensitivity is weaker when boards of directors are more effective. These results deepen our understanding of how equity compensation structures impact internal control quality under the post-SOX disclosure regime and have interesting policy implica-tions for regulators and firms concerning mandatory disclosure, corporate governance, and compensation design. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This research project is funded by the General Research Fund (GRF) of Hong Kong government and the National Nat-ural Science Foundation of China (NSFC-71402025). The authors gratefully acknowledge helpful comments from the reviewers of GRF and the participants of the research workshops at Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong Shue Yan University, Renmin University, Tsinghua University, University of Hong Kong, and University of International Busi-ness and Economics. The data used in this study are publicly available from the sources indicated in the text. (Paper received July 2015, revised version accepted June 2017) 

REFERENCES 

Acharya, V. V., & Bisin, A. (2009). Managerial hedging, equity ownership, and firm value. The RAND Journal of Economics , 40 ,47–77. Acito, A. A., Hogan, C. E., & Imdieke, A. J. (2014). Auditing Standard No. 2 versus Auditing Standard No. 5: Implications for integrated audits and financial reporting quality . Working Paper (Michigan State University). Armstrong, C. S., Jagolinzer, A. D., & Larcker, D. F. (2010). Chief executive officer equity incentives and accounting irregularities. 

Journal of Accounting Research , 48 , 225–271. Armstrong, C. S., Larcker, D. F., Ormazabal, G., & Taylor, D. J. (2013). The relation between equity incentives and misreporting: The role of risk-taking incentives. Journal of Financial Economics , 109 , 327–350. Armstrong, C. S., & Vashishtha, R. (2012). Executive stock options, differential risk-taking incentives, and firm value. Journal of Financial Economics , 104 , 70–88. Ashbaugh-Skaife, H., Collins, D. W., & Kinney, W. R. (2007). The discovery and reporting of internal control deficiencies prior to SOX-mandated audits. Journal of Accounting and Economics , 44 , 166–192. Ashbaugh-Skaife, H., Collins, D. W., Kinney, W. R., & LaFond, R. (2008). The effect of SOX internal control deficiencies and their remediation on accrual quality. The Accounting Review , 83 , 217–250. Ashbaugh-Skaife, H., Collins, D. W., Kinney, W. R., & LaFond, R. (2009). The effect of SOX internal control deficiencies on firm risk and cost of equity. Journal of Accounting Research , 47 , 1–43. Balsam, S., Jiang, W., & Lu, B. (2014). Equity incentives and internal control weaknesses. Contemporary Accounting Research , 31 ,178–201. Bamber, L. S., Jiang, J., Petroni, K. R., & Wang, I. Y. (2010). Comprehensive income: Who is afraid of performance reporting? The Accounting Review , 85 , 97–126. Beasley, M. S. (1996). An empirical analysis of the relation between the board of director composition and financial statement fraud. The Accounting Review , 71 , 443–465. Belsley, D. A. (1991). Conditioning Diagnostics: Collinearity and Weak Data in Regression . New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons. Beneish, M. D., Billings, M. B., & Hodder, L. D. (2008). Internal control weaknesses and information uncertainty. The Accounting Review , 83 , 665–703. Berger, A. N., & Bouwman, C. H. S. (2013). How does capital affect bank performance during financial crises? Journal of Financial Economics , 109 , 146–176. Bergstresser, D., & Philippon, T. (2006). CEO incentives and earnings management. Journal of Financial Economics , 80 , 511–529. Black, F., & Scholes, M. (1973). The pricing of options and corporate liabilities. Journal of Political Economy , 81 , 637–654. Bulow, J. I., Geanakoplos, J. D., & Klemperer, P. D. (1985). Multimarket oligopoly: Strategic substitutes and complements. Journal of Political Economy , 93 , 488–511. Bushman, R., Chen, Q., Engel, E., & Smith, A. (2004). Financial accounting information, organizational complexity and corporate governance systems. Journal of Accounting and Economics , 37 , 167–201. Chava, S., & Purnanandam, A. (2010). CEOs versus CFOs: Incentives and corporate policies. Journal of Financial Economics , 97 ,263–278. 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License LIU AND LIU 1365 

Chen, Y., Truong, C., & Veeraraghavan, M. (2015). CEO risk-taking incentives and the cost of equity capital. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting , 42 , 915–946. Cheng, Q., & Warfield, T. D. (2005). Equity incentives and earnings management. The Accounting Review , 80 , 441–476. Cohen, D. A., Dey, A., & Lys, T. Z. (2008). Real and accrual-based earnings management in the pre- and post-Sarbanes-Oxley periods. The Accounting Review , 83 , 757–787. Coles, J. L., Daniel, N. D., & Naveen, L. (2006). Managerial incentives and risk-taking. Journal of Financial Economics , 79 , 431–468. Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) (2011). Internal Control—Integrated Framework .New York, NY: COSO. Core, J., & Guay, W. (1999). The use of equity grants to manage optimal equity incentive levels. Journal of Accounting and Eco-nomics , 28 , 151–184. Core, J., & Guay, W. (2002). Estimating the value of employee stock option portfolios and their sensitivities to price and volatil-ity. Journal of Accounting Research , 40 , 613–630. Cornett, M. M., Marcus, A. J., & Tehranian, H. (2008). Corporate governance and pay-for-performance: The impact of earnings management. Journal of Financial Economics , 87 , 357–373. Costello, A. M., & Wittenberg-Moerman, R. (2011). The impact of financial reporting quality on debt contracting: Evidence from internal control weakness reports. Journal of Accounting Research , 49 , 97–136. Cox, C. (2007). Speech by SEC Chairman: Remarks to the annual meeting of the association of audit committee members. US Securities and Exchange Commission, June 1. Available at http://www.sec.gov/news/speech/2007/spch060107cc.htm (last accessed July 1, 2017). Dechow, P. M., Sloan, R. G., & Sweeney, A. P. (1996). Causes and consequences of earnings manipulation: An analysis of firms subject to enforcement actions by the SEC. Contemporary Accounting Research , 13 , 1–36. DeFond, M. L., Hann, R. N., & Hu, X. (2005). Does the market value financial expertise on audit committees of boards of direc-tors? Journal of Accounting Research , 43 , 153–193. DeFranco, G., Guan, Y., & Lu, H. (2005). The wealth change and redistribution effects of Sarbanes-Oxley internal control disclosures .Working Paper (University of Toronto). Desai, H., Hogan, C., & Wilkins, M. (2006). The reputational penalty for aggressive accounting: Earnings restatements and man-agement turnover. The Accounting Review , 81 , 83–112. Dhaliwal, D., Hogan, C., Trezevant, R., & Wilkins, M. (2011). Internal control disclosures, monitoring, and the cost of debt. The Accounting Review , 86 , 1131–1156. Dong, Z., Wang, C., & Xie, F. (2010). Do executive stock options induce excessive risk taking? Journal of Banking & Finance , 34 ,2518–2529. Doogar, R., Sivadasan, P., & Solomon, I. (2010). The regulation of public company auditing: Evidence from the transition to AS5. 

Journal of Accounting Research , 48 , 795–814. Doyle, J., Ge, W., & McVay, S. (2007a). Determinants of weaknesses in internal control over financial reporting. Journal of Accounting and Economics , 44 , 193–223. Doyle, J., Ge, W., & McVay, S. (2007b). Accruals quality and internal control over financial reporting. The Accounting Review , 82 ,1141–1170. Easley, D., & O’Hara, M. (2004). Information and the cost of capital. The Journal of Finance , 59 , 1553–1583. Erickson, M., Hanlon, M., & Maydew, E. (2006). Is there a link between executive equity incentives and accounting fraud? Journal of Accounting Research , 44 , 113–143. Ettredge, M., Heintz, J., Li, C., & Scholz, S. (2011). Auditor realignments accompanying implementation of SOX 404 ICFR report-ing requirements. Accounting Horizons , 25 , 17–39. Feng, M., Ge, W., Luo, S., & Shevlin, T. (2011). Why do CFOs become involved in material accounting manipulations? Journal of Accounting and Economics , 51 , 21–36. Francis, J., Philbrick, D., & Schipper, K. (1994). Shareholder litigation and corporate disclosures. Journal of Accounting Research ,

32 , 137–164. Garvey, G. (1997). Marketable incentive contracts and capital structure relevance. The Journal of Finance , 52 , 353–378. Goh, B. W. (2009). Audit committees, boards of directors, and remediation of material weaknesses in internal control. Contem-porary Accounting Research , 26 , 549–579. Goldberg, D. M. (2007). Focus on high-risk controls: The PCAOB’s Auditing Standard No. 5 enables publicly listed companies to narrow the scope of testing for Sarbanes-Oxley compliance. Internal Auditor , 64 , 69–71. 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 1366 LIU AND LIU 

Gormley, T. A., Matsa, D. A., & Milbourn, T. (2013). CEO compensation and corporate risk-taking: Evidence from a natural exper-iment. Journal of Accounting and Economics , 56 , 79–101. Guay, W. (1999). The sensitivity of CEO wealth to equity risk: An analysis of the magnitude and determinants. Journal of Finan-cial Economics , 53 , 43–71. Gupta, P. P., & Nayar, N. (2007). Information content of control deficiency disclosures under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act: An empir-ical investigation. International Journal of Disclosure and Governance , 4, 3–23. Halek, M., & Eisenhauer, J. G. (2001). Demography of risk aversion. Journal of Risk and Insurance , 68 , 1–24. Hammersley, J. S., Myers, L. A., & Shakespeare, C. (2008). Market reactions to the disclosure of internal control weaknesses and to the characteristics of those weaknesses under section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. Review of Accounting Studies , 13 , 141–165. Hammersley, J. S., Myers, L. A., & Zhou, J. (2012). The failure to remediate previously disclosed material weaknesses in internal controls. Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory , 31 , 73–111. Hoitash, R., Hoitash, U., & Johnstone, K. M. (2012). Internal control material weaknesses and CFO compensation. Contemporary Accounting Research , 29 , 768–803. Huson, M., Parrino, R., & Starks, L. (2001). Internal monitoring mechanisms and CEO turnover: A long-term perspective. The Journal of Finance , 56 , 2265–2297. Hsu, A. W.-H., & Liao, C.-H. (2012). Do compensation committees pay attention to Section 404 opinions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act? Journal of Business Finance & Accounting , 39 , 1240–1271. Jennings, R., & Marques, A. (2011). The joint effects of corporate governance and regulation on the disclosure of manager-adjusted non-GAAP earnings in the US. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting , 38 , 364–394. Jensen, M. (1986). Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers. American Economic Review , 76 , 323–329. Jensen, M. C., & Meckling, W. (1976). Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics , 3, 305–360. Jha, A., & Chen, Yu. (2015). Audit fees and social capital. The Accounting Review , 90 , 611–639. Jiang, J., Petroni, K. R., & Wang, I. Y. (2010). CFOs and CEOs: Who have the most influence on earnings management? Journal of Financial Economics , 96 , 513–526. Johnstone, K., Li, C., & Rupley, K. H. (2011). Changes in corporate governance associated with the revelation of internal control material weaknesses and their subsequent remediation. Contemporary Accounting Research , 28 , 331–383. Kim, J.-B., Li, Y., & Zhang, L. (2011a). CFOs versus CEOs: Equity incentives and crashes. Journal of Financial Economics , 101 ,713–730. Kim, J.-B., Song, B. Y., & Zhang, L. (2011b). Internal control weakness and bank loan contracting: Evidence from SOX Section 404 disclosures. The Accounting Review , 86 , 1157–1188. Klein, A. (2002). Audit committee, board of director characteristics, and earnings management. Journal of Accounting and Eco-nomics , 33 , 375–400. Knopf, J. D., Nam, J., & Thornton, J. H. (2002). The volatility and price sensitivities of managerial stock option portfolios and corporate hedging. The Journal of Finance , 57 , 801–813. Kobelsky, K., Lim, J.-H., & Jha, R. (2013). The impact of performance-based CEO and CFO compensation on internal control quality. Journal of Applied Business Research , 29 , 913–934. Krishnan, J. (2005). Audit committee quality and internal control: An empirical analysis. The Accounting Review , 80 , 649–675. Krishnan, J., Krishnan, J., & Song, H. (2011). The effect of Auditing Standard No. 5 on audit fees. Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory , 30 , 1–27. Lambert, R., Larcker, D. F., & Verrecchia, R. E. (1991). Portfolio considerations in valuing executive compensation. Journal of Accounting Research , 29 , 129–149. Lambert, R., Leuz, C., & Verrecchia, R. E. (2007). Accounting information, disclosure, and the cost of capital. Journal of Accounting Research , 45 , 385–420. Laux, V. (2007). Board independence and CEO turnover. Journal of Accounting Research , 46 , 137–171. Li, C., Sun, L., & Ettredge, M. (2010). Financial executive qualifications, financial executive turnover, and adverse SOX 404 opin-ions. Journal of Accounting and Economics , 50 , 93–110. Low, A. (2009). Managerial risk-taking behavior and equity-based compensation. Journal of Financial Economics , 92 , 470–490. Lucier, C., Schuyt, R., & Handa, J. (2004). CEO succession 2003: The perils of "good" governance . McLean, VA: Booz Allen Hamilton. Merton, R. (1973). Theory of rational option pricing. Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science , 4, 141–183. 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License LIU AND LIU 1367 

Moody’s (2004). Section 404 Reports on Internal Control: Impact on Ratings Will Depend on Nature of Material Weaknesses Reported. Special Comment . New York, NY: Moody’s Investors Service, Global Credit Research. Moody’s (2006). The Second Year of Section 404 Reporting on Internal Control. Special Comment . New York, NY: Moody’s Investors Service, Global Credit Research. Norton, E. C., Wang, H., & Ai, C. (2004). Computing interaction effects and standard errors in logit and probit models. The Stata Journal , 4, 154–167. Ogneva, M., Subramanyam, K. R., & Raghunandan, K. (2007). Internal control weakness and cost of equity: Evidence from SOX Section 404 disclosures. The Accounting Review , 82 , 1255–1297. Pastor, L., & Veronesi, P. (2003). Stock valuation and learning about profitability. The Journal of Finance , 58 , 1749–1790. Powell, M., & Ansic, D. (1997). Gender differences in risk behaviour in financial decision-making: An experimental analysis. 

Journal of Economic Psychology , 18 , 605–628. Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) (2004). An Audit of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting Performed in Conjunction with an Audit of Financial Statements. Auditing Standard No. 2 . Washington, D.C.: PCAOB. Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) (2007). An Audit of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting That Is Inte-grated with an Audit of Financial Statements. Auditing Standard No. 5 . Washington, D.C.: PCAOB. Rajgopal, S., & Shevlin, T. (2002). Empirical evidence on the relation between stock option compensation and risk taking. Journal of Accounting and Economics , 33 , 145–171. Rajgopal, S., & Venkatachalam, M. (2011). Financial reporting quality and idiosyncratic return volatility. Journal of Accounting and Economics , 51 , 1–20. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) (2002). Certification of Disclosure in Companies’ Quarterly and Annual Reports; Release Nos. 33-8124, 34-46427 . Washington, D.C.: SEC. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) (2003). Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting and Certifi-cation of Disclosure in Exchange Act Periodic Reports. Release Nos. 33-8238, 34-7986 . Washington, D.C.: SEC. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) (2004). Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting and Certifi-cation of Disclosure in Exchange Act Periodic Reports—Frequently Asked Questions . Washington, D.C.: SEC. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) (2010). Internal Control Over Financial Reporting in Exchange Act Periodic Reports of Non-Accelerated Filers. Release Nos. 33-9142, 34-62914 . Washington, D.C.: SEC. US House of Representatives (2002). The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. Public Law 107–204 [H. R. 3763] . Washington, D.C.: Gov-ernment Printing Office. Wang, X. (2010). Increased disclosure requirements and corporate governance decisions: Evidence from chief financial officers in the pre- and post-Sarbanes-Oxley periods. Journal of Accounting Research , 48 , 885–920. Wang, D., & Zhou, J. (2012). The impact of PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 5 on audit fees and audit quality. Accounting Horizons ,

26 , 493–511. Weber, M. (2006). Sensitivity of executive wealth to stock price, corporate governance and earnings management. Review of Accounting and Finance , 5, 321–354. Ye, Z., Hermanson, D. R., & Krishnan, J. (2013). Shareholder voting in director elections and initial SOX Section 404 reports. 

Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance , 28 , 103–127. Zhang, Y., Zhou, J., & Zhou, N. (2007). Audit committee quality, auditor independence, and internal control weaknesses. Journal of Accounting and Public Policy , 26 , 300–327. 

How to cite this article: Liu X, Liu X. CEO equity incentives and the remediation of material weaknesses in internal control. J. Bus Fin Acc . 2017;44:1338–1369. https://doi.org/10.1111/jbfa.12265. 

APPENDIX A Calculation of executive equity incentives 

The value of stock options is based on the modified Black-Scholes formula (Merton, 1973) and estimated following the Core and Guay (2002) one-year approximation method for newly granted options and previously granted options, both exercisable and unexercisable. 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 1368 LIU AND LIU 

Calculation of price sensitivity (delta) 

A manager’s delta is calculated as the dollar change in the value of the manager’s stock portfolio resulting from a 1 percent change in stock price, plus the dollar change in the value of the manager’s option portfolio resulting from a 1 percent change in stock price. Specifically, we employ equation (A1) ((A2)) to calculate delta for 1 unit of stock (stock option). delta per unit of stock = [ ?? (stock value )/ ?? (price )] * ( price /100 ) = S/100 , (A1) delta per unit of option = [ ?? (option value )/ ?? (price )] * ( price /100 ) = e-dT N (Z) × ( S/100 ), (A2) where 

Z = [ln (S/X) + T(r - d + ?? (2) /2)]/ ?? T(1/2),N = cumulative probability function for the normal distribution, 

S = price of the underlying stock at the beginning of the remediation year, 

X = exercise price of the option, 

?? = expected stock return volatility over the life of the option, 

r = natural logarithm of risk-free interest rate, 

T = time to maturity of the option in years, 

d = natural logarithm of expected dividend yield over the life of the option. We then multiply delta per unit of stock (option) by the number of shares (options) held by the manager and treat the aggregated amount as the manager’s delta. 

Calculation of volatility sensitivity (vega) 

A manager’s vega is calculated as the dollar change in the value of the manager’s option portfolio resulting from a 1 percent change in stock return volatility. Specifically, we employ equation (A3) to calculate vega for 1 unit of stock option. vega per unit = [ ?? (option value )/ ?? (stock volatility )] × ( stock volatility /100 ) = e(- dT )N' (Z)ST (1/2) × ( ?? /100 ), (A3) where N' = normal density function. We then multiply vega per unit of stock option by the number of options held by the manager to calculate the man-ager’s vega. 

APPENDIX B Variable definition Variable Definition Data source Dependent variable: Remediation promptness 

PROMPT 1 if a firm remedies material weaknesses (MWs) in internal control in the fiscal year following their initial disclosure, 0 otherwise 

AuditAnalytics 

Independent variables: Management incentives and compensation 

DELTA CEO price sensitivity, which equals the dollar change in the value of CEO stock and stock option portfolios resulting from a 1% change in stock price (see Appendix A) 

Compustat-ExecuComp/manually collected from EDGAR VEGA CEO volatility sensitivity, which equals the dollar change in the value of CEO stock option portfolio resulting from a 1% change in stock return volatility (see Appendix A) 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License LIU AND LIU 1369 

Variable Definition Data source 

DELTA '

DELTA scaled by the sum of DELTA and CEO salary and bonus 

VEGA '

VEGA scaled by the sum of VEGA and CEO salary and bonus 

DELTA_CFO CFO price sensitivity, which equals the dollar change in the value of CFO stock and stock option portfolios resulting from a 1% change in stock price 

VEGA_CFO CFO volatility sensitivity, which equals the dollar change in the value of CFO stock option portfolio resulting from a 1% change in stock return volatility 

?DELTA Change in CEO price sensitivity, which equals the DELTA at the end of the remediation year minus the DELTA at the beginning of the remediation year 

?VEGA Change in CEO volatility sensitivity, which equals the VEGA at the end of the remediation year minus the VEGA at the beginning of the remediation year 

SALARY CEO salary (ExecuComp SALARY )

BONUS CEO bonus (ExecuComp BONUS )

SALARY_CFO CFO salary 

BONUS_CFO CFO bonus 

Independent variables: Effectiveness of boards of directors 

BODEFF A composite measure of board effectiveness, which equals the sum of the dichotomized values of audit committee size, audit committee financial expertise, and board independence. We dichotomize a variable by assigning the value of 1 to firms with the variable value equal to or greater than the sample median, 0 otherwise 

Manually collected from EDGAR 

Independent variables: Auditor characteristics 

NONAUDFEE Ratio of non-audit fees (AuditAnalytics NON-AUDIT FEES ) to total fees (AuditAnalytics TOTAL FEES ) charged by auditor in the remediation year 

AuditAnalytics BIG 1 if a firm is audited by a Big 4 audit firm (AuditAnalytics AUDITOR KEY ) over the remediation year, 0 otherwise 

NEWAUD 1 if there is an auditor change (AuditAnalytics AUDITOR KEY ) between the remediation year and the prior year, 0 otherwise 

Independent variables: CEO job security and CFO turnover 

JOBSECURITY The sum of DUALITY and BOARDIND . DUALITY equals 1 if the CEO is also the chairman of the board of directors, 0 otherwise. BOARDIND 

equals 1 if the percentage of outside directors on the firm’s board is smaller than the sample median, 0 otherwise 

Manually collected from EDGAR NEWCFO 1 if there is a CFO change between the remediation year and the prior year, 0 otherwise 

Compustat-ExecuComp/manually collected from EDGAR 

Independent variables: Firm characteristics 

LNTA Natural log of firm total assets (Compustat AT ) Compustat-North America ROA Ratio of net income (Compustat NI ) to average assets in the remediation year 

SEVERITY 1 if a firm reports at least one entity-level MW or three account-specific MWs, 0 otherwise 

Manually collected from EDGAR TURNOVER Ratio of sales (Compustat SALE ) to average assets in the remediation year 

Compustat-North America FOREIGN 1 if a firm reports non-zero foreign currency adjustments (Compustat 

FCA_FN ) in the remediation year, 0 otherwise 

MA 1 if a firm is involved in a merger or acquisition (Compustat AFNT#1 ) in the remediation year, 0 otherwise 

LEV Ratio of total liabilities (Compustat LT ) to total assets 14685957, 2017, 9-10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12265 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

