Title: Generalist CEOs, management risk and internal control weaknesses

URL Source: blob://pdf/da3139b2-670c-471b-a08d-89e0b62a3918

Markdown Content:
Received: 21 August 2019 Revised: 5 December 2022 Accepted: 26 January 2023 DOI: 10.1111/jbfa.12691 

A R T I C L E Generalist CEOs, management risk and internal control weaknesses Xiaolu Xu 

Accounting and Finance, College of Management, University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 

Correspondence 

Xiaolu Xu, Accounting and Finance, College of Management, University of Massachusetts Boston, 100 Morrissey Blvd, Boston, MA 02125, USA. Email: xiaolu.xu@umb.edu 

## Abstract 

This study examines the relationship between CEOs’ gen-eral ability and the quality of internal control over financial reporting (ICFR). Using a sample of S&P 1500 firms in the United States from 2004 to 2015, I find that firms with generalist (specialist) CEOs are more (less) likely to report internal control weaknesses under Section 404 of Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (ICW404). The positive relationship between generalist CEOs and ICW404 is weaker when the management risk is lower (longer CEO tenure). These results are robust to alternative models and approaches to address potential endogeneity issues. Additional analy-ses suggest that this positive relationship is attributed to generalist CEOs’ excessive risk taking. Furthermore, CEO type is related to company-wide ICW404, ICW404 due to staffing, complexity and general issues, rather than account-specific ICW404 or ICW404 due to revenue recognition issues. Drawing from the Upper Echelons Theory, this study contributes to the research on ICFR quality by documenting CEO type as an additional determinant of ICW404. It high-lights the importance of investors, auditors and regulators considering the CEO’s career experience and operating style when assessing a firm’s internal control environment. It also adds to the literature on general managerial ability by doc-umenting the cost of hiring generalist CEOs regarding ICFR quality. 

J Bus Fin Acc. 2024;51:209–239. © 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 209 wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jbfa 210 XU 

K E Y W O R D S 

CEO tenure, generalists CEOs, internal control weaknesses, Section 404 reporting, specialist CEOs 

J E L C L A S S I F I C AT I O N 

G3, M42, M48 

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

A stream of research has been developed to examine general managerial ability, that is, the ability and skills transfer-able across firms or industries (Becker, 1962; Murphy & Zabojnik, 2004). CEOs can be classified into different types based on the level of general ability and skills they possess. Specifically, generalist CEOs refer to CEOs whose man-agerial skills are general in nature and readily transferable to other firms or industries. Generalist CEOs usually have diverse skill sets and career experience from various industries, firms and organizational areas. By contrast, specialist CEOs have longer tenures and more profound knowledge of certain industries and firms. Therefore, their managerial skills are more firm or industry specific and less transferable (Ma et al., 2021a). The different impacts of generalist versus specialist CEOs on corporate outcomes can be best explained by the Upper Echelons Theory. Developed by Hambrick & Mason (1984), the Upper Echelons Theory proposes that observ-able upper echelon characteristics, such as executives’ functional tracks, career experience, industry tenure and familiarity and so on, help shape top managers’ perceptions and make strategic choices. Since generalist CEOs usu-ally have different upper echelon characteristics from specialist CEOs, for example, more diverse career background and experience, it is not surprising that they have a different philosophy and risk preference from specialist CEOs and tend to make different managerial choices. Consistent with the Upper Echelons Theory, empirical studies find that generalist CEOs are associated with different corporate strategies and performance from specialist CEOs (Chen et al., 2020, 2021; Custódio et al., 2019; Gounopoulos & Pham, 2018). This study investigates the relationship between CEOs’ general ability and the quality of internal control over finan-cial reporting (ICFR). ICFR refers to corporate policies and procedures designed to provide reasonable assurance of a firm’s reliable financial reporting. CEOs play a crucial role in maintaining effective ICFR. They set the tone in the internal control environment, assess risks, allocate resources and share responsibilities of designing and overseeing internal controls. Therefore, a CEO’s managerial philosophy and operating style could influence a company’s ICFR system and its effectiveness. For example, in its 2014 10-K report, Hertz Global explicitly attributed the identified internal control weaknesses to its former CEO’s “management style and temperament.” Auditing standards also con-sider management’s philosophy and operating style as an important aspect of the control environment that helps to promote effective ICFR (PCAOB AS, 2110). The Upper Echelons Theory and auditing standards suggest that generalist CEOs have a different managerial phi-losophy, risk preference and operating style from specialist CEOs, leading to different ICFR quality. In other words, CEO type based on different levels of general ability is considered a determinant of a firm’s ICFR quality since ICFR that is effective for firms with one type of CEO (e.g., specialists) might not be sufficient for firms with another type (e.g., generalists). However, it is unclear from the prior literature whether and how CEO type/style affects ICFR quality. 1From the perspective of CEO risk preference and firm agency cost, I predict that generalist CEOs (specialist CEOs) are associated with lower (higher) ICFR quality following two explanations: risk taking and opportunism. First, gen-eralist CEOs are likely to take excessive risks (Ma et al., 2021a, 2021b; Mishra, 2014). Generalist CEOs’ diverse experience and skills allow them to explore new areas and launch new initiatives (Chen et al., 2021; Custódio et al., 1 Prior studies have documented many firm- and auditor-specific characteristics that affect a firm’s ICFR quality (Doyle, Ge, & McVay, 2007a; Hoitash, Hoitash, & Bedard, 2008; Albring, Elder, & Xu, 2018). Please refer to two review studies, Schneider, Gramling, Hermanson, & Ye (2009) and Chalmers, Hay, & Khlif (2019), for a complete list of studies examining the internal control quality determinants. 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License XU 211 

2019). Their higher mobility in the executive labor market also incentivizes them to invest in short-term, higher risk projects (Mishra, 2014). Thus, generalist CEOs are more likely to use an innovative, risk-taking strategy and a diverse operation. Compared with specialist CEOs, generalist CEOs’ operating strategies and styles involve complex orga-nizational structures and diverse transactions, which demand a decentralized and flexible internal control system (Bentley et al., 2013). However, it would be more challenging for managers to maintain such an internal control system effectively (Bentley-Goode et al., 2017; Simons, 1987). For example, more personnel training, multidepartment coordi-nation, more comprehensive and iterative risk assessments, frequent system modifications and technology upgrades are required. If such a sophisticated and costly system is not well designed or implemented, there will be more control problems. In particular, generalist CEOs’ higher risk tolerance and overconfidence in diverse operations could lead to insufficient risk evaluations and risk mitigation controls. By contrast, specialist CEOs are more risk averse and tend to focus on markets or products they are familiar with. A centralized and formalized accounting control system would be adequate to assure reliable financial reporting for their operating style. Following this risk-taking explanation, holding other determinants constant, firms with generalist CEOs (specialist CEOs) are more (less) likely to be associated with inadequate ICFR. Second, from the agency cost perspective, generalist CEOs might have more incentives to engage in financial misre-porting and self-serving activities. Literature documents a more severe agency problem in firms with generalist CEOs since their long-term wealth is less contingent on a particular firm’s future cash flows (Gounopoulos & Pham, 2018; Mishra, 2014). Studies also find that generalist CEOs are more likely to overstate their abilities, and their compensa-tion is more sensitive to accounting and stock performance (Brockman et al., 2016; Custódio et al., 2013; Liu et al., 2021). Such compensation structures provide generalist CEOs extra incentives to manipulate accounting numbers (Armstrong et al., 2013; Burns & Kedia, 2006). As a result, generalist CEOs have fewer incentives to promote a strong internal control system that limits their ability to exploit discretion. They are even “tempted to override internal con-trol systems and/or take full advantage of material internal control weaknesses (MWs) to achieve better performance or higher compensation” (Lin et al., 2014, p. 24). This opportunism explanation also leads to the conjecture of a nega-tive association between generalist CEOs and ICFR quality. Please note that these two explanations are not mutually exclusive. For example, generalist CEOs’ tendency to overinvest in risky projects increases their opportunistic incen-tives to misreport financial information to obtain favorable financing or hide poor financial performance (Ma et al., 2021b). On the contrary, CEO type may not significantly affect the ICFR quality. First, generalist CEOs’ superior knowledge and experience in multiple industries and diverse areas could help better address increased operational and financial misreporting risks (Ma et al., 2021b). Second, generalist CEOs’ distinct operating strategy and style might only affect specific areas of an internal control system without influencing controls over external financial reporting (Bentley-Goode et al., 2017). Third, generalist CEOs’ opportunistic misreporting and self-serving incentives could be reduced by potentially losing reputations and future employment opportunities (e.g., Haisilip et al., 2015). Therefore, whether CEO type affects ICFR quality is an empirical question. I empirically test these predictions using a sample of S&P1500 firms from 2004 to 2015. I compute General Ability Index (GAI) to measure a CEO’s general skills and experience, following Custódio et al. (2013). This index combines five aspects of a CEO’s lifetime work experience, including prior CEO experience and experience with different firms, functions, industries and business segments. A higher value in GAI indicates a more general CEO ability. I define gener-alist CEOs (specialist CEOs) as CEOs with GAI ranks in the top (bottom) one-third of the sample in a particular year. A firm’s ICFR quality is proxied by internal control weaknesses under Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (referred to as ICW404 hereafter). Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (2002) requires management and auditors to evaluate the effectiveness of a firm’s ICFR and disclose any material weaknesses in its annual filing. Using alternative logistic regressions, I find a positive (negative) association between GAI or generalist CEOs (specialist CEOs) and the likeli-hood of reporting ICW404. The positive association between generalist CEOs and ICW404 is weaker as CEO tenure increases. I explore the two explanations for the association between CEOs’ general ability and ICW404. I find a positive (neg-ative) association between generalist (specialist) CEOs and ICW404 among higher risk-taking firms but no significant 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 212 XU 

associations among lower risk-taking firms, strongly supporting the risk-taking explanation for both generalist and specialist CEOs. Additional analyses show that CEO type is associated with company-level ICW404, ICW404 due to staffing, complexity or general issues, rather than account-specific ICW404 or ICW404 due to revenue recognition problems. One challenge of this study is the potential endogeneity issues. First, the selection of generalist CEOs is endoge-nously determined. For example, large firms with complex structures and transactions are more likely to appoint generalist CEOs who can manage a diverse portfolio. Such firms are more likely to have internal control problems. Therefore, the sample might suffer from a selection bias. Second, there could be factors that affect both the like-lihood of appointing generalist CEOs and the likelihood of reporting ICW404 but are omitted from the regression models. I use the propensity score matching approach to mitigate the sample selection bias. I find a consistent positive relationship between generalist CEOs (or GAI) and ICW404 using the matched sample. To mitigate the issue of omit-ted correlated variables, I implement changes analyses. I find that a change from a nongeneralist CEO to a generalist CEO (or an increase in GAI) is positively associated with a deteriorated ICFR. A change from a nonspecialist CEO to a specialist CEO is positively associated with an improved ICFR. Overall, the main results are robust to methodologies addressing endogeneity issues. The contribution of this study is twofold. First, this study links management theory to the research on ICFR quality. Prior studies show that ICFR quality is associated with firm characteristics, auditor and engagement characteristics and corporate governance (Albring et al., 2018; Doyle et al., 2007a, 2007b; Krishnan, 2005). This study provides evidence that CEO type based on different levels of general managerial ability is a determinant of ICFR quality. Management theory predicts that a firm’s ICFR quality is influenced by top executives’ ability, experience and style. Campbell et al. (2016, p. 272) point out that “top-executives’ functional background and employment history, labelled as ‘manager styles’, could be additional factors causing ICW since top executives are the key decision makers respon-sible for corporate activities.” Although a few studies have examined the impact of CEO characteristics on internal control reporting (e.g., Lin et al., 2014), there is little evidence of the association between CEOs’ general ability and firms’ ICFR quality. This study attempts to fill this gap and provides evidence supporting the Upper Echelons Theory. It highlights the importance of investors, auditors and regulators considering the CEO’s career experience and ability when assessing a firm’s internal control environment. Second, this study contributes to the studies on general managerial ability. Prior studies document both benefits (e.g., Custódio et al., 2019) and costs (e.g., Ma et al., 2021a, 2021b; Mishra, 2014) of hiring a generalist CEO. This paper is consistent with prior studies that generalist CEOs are likely to take excessive risks and are associated with higher misreporting risks. Further, this study adds to this line of research by documenting another cost regarding a firm’s internal control quality. Given the popularity of generalist CEOs in the executive labor market, this study has a practical implication for hiring generalist CEOs. Besides the value a generalist CEO could create, the boards and shareholders should consider the possible impact on a firm’s internal control quality. In addition, I find that the positive relationship between CEOs’ general ability and ICW404 is weaker as CEO tenure increases, which adds to the studies on CEO tenure. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the related literature and develops the research hypotheses. Section 3 describes the variables, data and models. Section 4 discusses the empirical results and Section 5 concludes the paper. 

## 2 LITERATURE REVIEW AND HYPOTHESES DEVELOPMENT 2.1 CEOs’ general managerial ability 

The literature on general managerial ability shows that generalist CEOs, whose managerial skills are general in nature and readily transferable to other firms or industries, are more demanded in the executive labor market and are paid more (Brockman et al., 2016; Custódio et al., 2013). There are several reasons. First, it is easier to apply and transfer 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License XU 213 

general managerial abilities and skills across firms and industries (Custódio et al., 2013). Second, due to changes in the product markets and the development of technologies, general managerial ability is more important in the modern business world (Cunat & Guadalupe, 2009a, 2009b; Custódio et al., 2013, 2019; Hubbard & Palia, 1995; Murphy & Zabojnik, 2004, 2007). Third, general managerial ability is particularly demanded when firms experience special situa-tions, such as restructuring, mergers and acquisitions, industrial shocks and financial distress (Eisfeldt & Papanikolaou, 2013; Mishra, 2014). Given the increased importance of CEOs’ general ability, prior studies have documented the ben-efits of appointing generalist CEOs, such as mitigating underinvestment in the crisis period (Andreou et al., 2017) or creating more value in diversifying acquisitions (Chen et al., 2021). Since generalist CEOs possess diverse experience, knowledge and skills that can be applied across firms and indus-tries, they are more likely to explore new areas, launch new initiatives and engage in risky projects, for example, innovations and acquisitions. The broader opportunity set in the executive labor market reduces the potential risk of termination and unemployment if the projects fail. Therefore, generalist CEOs are more failure-tolerant than spe-cialist CEOs. Consistent with this argument, Chen et al. (2021) find that generalist CEOs are more likely to engage in unrelated acquisitions. Custódio et al. (2019) provide evidence that firms with generalist CEOs produce more patents and are more likely to enter new technological areas. From an agency perspective, generalist CEOs’ wealth and career paths are less contingent on one particular firm’s future cash flows since they are more likely to engage in job hop-ping. By contrast, specialist CEOs’ wealth and career paths are more contingent on the current firm’s performance and longevity. Therefore, generalist CEOs have different risk-taking incentives from specialist CEOs. Specifically, Mishra (2014) shows that generalist CEOs are more likely to invest in short-term but higher risk projects. The cost of equity is higher for firms with a generalist CEO because investors demand a higher rate of return for the CEO’s excessive risk-taking behaviors and the higher agency cost. In conclusion, generalist CEOs are more likely to use an innovative strategy and take excessive risks. Prior studies indicate a more severe agency problem in firms with generalist CEOs (Mishra, 2014). So generalist CEOs are more likely to behave to serve their own benefits. The traditional view of agency theory suggests that firms might use accounting-based contracts or equity-based compensation to better align the interests of managers and shareholders. For example, studies find that generalist CEOs, especially those hired from outside, are usually paid at a premium (Brockman et al., 2016; Custódio et al., 2013). Liu et al. (2021) find that generalist CEOs are likely to overstate their abilities to a more extent when contracting with firms. Therefore, corporate boards would grant generalist CEOs compensation that is more sensitive to accounting and stock performance. However, such contracts could also provide managers extra incentives to manipulate accounting and stock performance to achieve higher compensation (Heflin et al., 2002). For example, O’Connor et al. (2006, p. 486) argue that equity-based compensation, for example, stock options, can “exacerbate the moral hazard facing CEOs by providing extra incentives for self-interested behaviors.” Dong et al. (2010) find that stock options induce excess risk taking, which is inconsistent with stock options aligning the interests of managers and shareholders. Studies on CEO compensation have provided extensive evidence of a positive relationship between financial misreporting and CEOs’ equity incentives (Armstrong et al., 2013; Bergstresser & Philippon, 2006; Burns & Kedia, 2006; Cheng & Warfield, 2005). The higher agency cost associated with generalist CEOs might not be completely eliminated by offering incentive compensation without inducing extra incentives of manipulation. Thus, it is reasonable to conjecture that generalist CEOs have more incentives to exploit the available discretion and behave opportunistically. In a similar vein, recent studies show that generalist CEOs are not always beneficial to the firms and stakehold-ers. Gounopoulos & Pham (2018) show that compared with generalist CEOs, IPO firms with specialist CEOs are more likely to survive for a longer time post IPOs. Drawing from instrumental leadership and domain expertise models, Li & Patel (2019) find a negative relationship between CEOs’ general experience and firm performance. Their results sug-gest that generalist CEOs lack firm-specific expertise and knowledge to align human capital, external environment and internal resources, which leads to the unsuccessful application of their general skills into firm-specific contexts. Chen et al. (2020) find that firms with generalist CEOs are less likely to engage in corporate social responsibilities (CSR). Ma 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 214 XU 

et al. (2021a, 2021b) confirm that generalist CEOs are likely to take more risks as their strategic priority. This excessive risk-taking strategy is perceived negatively by both bondholders and auditors. 

## 2.2 Internal control over financial reporting 

ICFR refers to corporate procedures and policies designed to provide reasonable assurance of reliable financial report-ing. They are implemented to prevent or detect material misstatements. Section 404(a) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act requires all publicly traded firms to certify the effectiveness of their ICFR, and Section 404(b) requires accelerated filers to have an auditor express an opinion on the effectiveness of their ICFR. Firms’ internal control weaknesses have negative economic consequences. For example, Ittonen (2010) finds negative abnormal returns around the audit report dates and 10-K filing dates when the auditors’ material weakness reports conflict with the preceding man-agement disclosures on internal controls. Skaife et al. (2013) find that insider trading is more profitable in firms with internal control weaknesses. Several studies show that material weaknesses and deficiencies are related to higher financing costs and unfavorable financing agreements (e.g., Ashbaugh-Skaife, Collins, Kinney, & LaFond, 2009; Costello & Wittenberg-Moerman, 2011; Dhaliwal et al., 2011; Kim et al., 2011). Lai (2019) shows that material weaknesses negatively affect relationship-specific investments by suppliers and customers. Experimental studies also find that investors negatively react to disclosing material weaknesses and are less likely to invest in a firm with ineffective internal controls (Church & Schneider, 2016). There is extensive research on the firm and auditor characteristics associated with material weaknesses (e.g., Ashbaugh-Skaife et al., 2007; Doyle et al., 2007a; Naiker & Sharma, 2009). For example, Doyle et al. (2007a) find that firms disclosing material weaknesses tend to be smaller, younger, growing faster, more complex, financially weaker or more likely to undergo restructuring. Prior research also finds that internal control weaknesses are associated with higher audit fees in the year of the ICW disclosure (e.g., Foster et al., 2007; Hoitash et al., 2008; Raghunandan & Rama, 2006) and higher unexpected audit fees in the prior year (Albring et al., 2018). In addition to the firm- and audit-related characteristics, some studies examine the impact of executive character-istics on internal control reporting. For example, Lin et al. (2014) find that CEO entrenchment is positively related to an ICW404, supporting that entrenched CEOs are more likely to exploit private benefits at the expense of sharehold-ers’ interest. They also find that CEO age is negatively related to a material weakness because older CEOs have higher organizational commitments and are more conservative in investing and financial reporting. He (2015) finds that firms with larger CEO inside debt are less likely to report an internal control weakness, suggesting that a CEO with larger inside debt has more incentives to invest in a good internal control system to avoid default risk. Li et al. (2010) show that firms with adverse Section 404 opinions in 2004 had less qualified CFOs and experienced more CFO turnovers in 2005. A firm’s ICFR quality is also influenced by the interaction between its CEO and other parties in the firm. Lisic et al. (2016) argue that CEO power reduces an audit committee’s effectiveness by providing low-quality information, reduc-ing its monitoring level and intervening in the committee agenda, which leads to more internal control weaknesses. A CEO could also affect a firm’s internal control quality through his/her interaction with other executives. Built on the concept of occupational communities, Campbell et al. (2016) find a negative relation between CEO and CFO joint tenure and internal control weaknesses. 

## 2.3 Generalist CEOs, specialist CEOs and ICFR 

The Upper Echelons Theory suggests that CEOs’ values and cognitive perceptions are reflected in corporate outcomes (Hambrick & Mason, 1984). CEOs develop their management skills, operating styles and firm- and industry-related knowledge from their functional track orientation and career experience, which helps form their values and cogni-14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License XU 215 

tive perceptions. CEOs with different skill sets, operating styles or industry/firm knowledge have different managerial choices and decision-making processes, leading to distinct organizational outcomes. As a crucial area of organizational outcomes, an internal control system is an “integrated, top-down and dynamic system of operation analysis, com-pliance and reporting” (Campbell et al., 2016, p. 272). A CEO plays a key role in designing ICFR and maintaining its effectiveness. Specifically, CEOs set the tone in the control environment over financial reporting, assess risks, allocate resources and share responsibilities of designing and overseeing control activities. Following the Upper Echelons The-ory, CEOs with different levels of general ability could have different priorities and decisions when performing their responsibilities in the ICFR. Therefore, CEO type could determine a firm’s ICFR and its effectiveness. There are two explanations as to how CEO type/style could affect a firm’s ICFR quality. First, as suggested by CEO risk preference and organizational theories, generalist CEOs’ innovative and risk-taking strategies usually involve complex organizational structures and transactions in diverse areas. To facilitate such an innovative and diverse opera-tion, firms with generalist CEOs have a higher demand for a decentralized and flexible internal control system so they can explore new opportunities and respond to market or technology changes quickly (Bentley et al., 2013; Bentley-Goode et al., 2017; Miles & Snow, 1978, 2003). However, it would be more challenging and costly to maintain such an internal control system effectively. For example, more personnel training, multidepartment coordination, more com-prehensive and iterative risk assessments, frequent system modifications and technology upgrades are required. More control problems will result if such sophisticated and costly systems are not well designed or implemented. By con-trast, specialist CEOs are more risk averse. They usually focus on limited markets and products they are familiar with. Therefore, firms with specialist CEOs might use a more centralized and formalized accounting control system, which is less challenging to maintain (Bentley-Goode et al., 2017). Consistent with this argument, Bentley-Goode et al. (2017) find that innovative “prospector” companies are associated with weaker ICFR and are more likely to report ICW404. Different risk appetites between generalist and specialist CEOs lead to different risk assessments and approaches to addressing risks. For example, for projects involving multi-industry operations, a generalist CEO might be more confident in doing business in different industries and assess the risk level as medium/low. In contrast, a specialist CEO might assess its risk level as high. Accordingly, the generalist CEO might not see the need to impose as many controls as specialists do to mitigate the risk, resulting in insufficient risk evaluations and mitigation controls. Consistent with this excessive risk-taking explanation, Bargeron et al. (2010) find that Section 404 of SOX “discourages companies from investing in risky projects that increase the likelihood that the controls will be compromised and alleged to be deficient” (Bargeron et al., 2010, p. 35). Second, generalist CEOs’ interests are less aligned with that of shareholders, leading to a higher agency cost. As a result, they have more incentives to exploit the available discretion to engage in misreporting and self-serving activities. As previously discussed, generalist CEOs also have more incentives to overstate financial performance to demonstrate their abilities and get higher compensation. Consequently, they have fewer incentives to invest in a good internal control system that helps prevent opportunistic behaviors. They could even take advantage of compromised internal controls or override the existing ICFR to engage in self-serving activities. This opportunism explanation pre-dicts that generalist CEOs are more likely to be associated with material weaknesses of ICFR. Please note that the excessive risk-taking and opportunism explanations are not mutually exclusive. Specifically, due to generalist CEOs’ tendency to overinvest in risky projects, firms with generalist CEOs’ have a higher external financing need to sup-port their investments. They are also more likely to use up financial slack quickly and experience lower profitability. Therefore, firms with generalist CEOs are more likely to misreport financial information to obtain favorable external financing or hide poor financial performance (Ma et al., 2021b). Overall, both explanations suggest that a firm’s ICFR quality is a function of CEO type/style. ICFR that is effective for firms with specialist CEOs might not be sufficient for firms with generalist CEOs. Compared with specialist CEOs, generalist CEOs are more likely to be associated with inadequate or “flawed” ICFR, and they are more likely to override existing ICFR, resulting in more ICW404. It is also possible that generalist CEOs are not associated with impaired ICFR quality. First, although generalist CEOs’ strategies or managerial choices lead to increased operational and misreporting risks, their superior knowl-edge and experience in diverse areas and industries might help address these risks. Second, generalist CEOs’ distinct 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 216 XU 

operating strategy and style might only affect specific areas of internal control systems without extending to con-trols over external financial reporting (Bentley-Goode et al., 2017). Third, disclosed material weaknesses of ICFR have reputational cost to managers and adversely affect director nominations (Ye et al., 2013), their compensation (Hsu & Liao, 2012) or subsequent employment (Haisilip et al., 2015). Although generalist CEOs usually have advantages over specialist CEOs in the executive labor market, the potential loss in future employment opportunities could reduce gen-eralist CEOs’ opportunistic misreporting or self-serving behaviors. They may not engage in such behaviors unless the expected benefits exceed expected costs, for example, in a scenario of higher CEO power with lower monitoring. Thus, a significant relationship between CEO type and ICFR quality might not be directly observed. Taken together, since I use ICW404 to proxy for a firm’s ICFR quality in this study, the testable relationship between generalist (specialist) CEOs and ICW404 is hypothesized in the alternative form: 

H1: There is a positive (negative) association between generalist (specialist) CEOs and Section 404 internal control weaknesses. The relation between a CEO’s general ability and ICFR quality might not be the same over time. The literature on CEO tenure shows that the uncertainty of a CEO’s ability is higher in the early years of service; therefore, CEOs have stronger incentives to overstate earnings in the early years than in later years (Ali & Zhang, 2015). Pan et al. (2018) refer to this uncertainty of managers’ ability and its impact on firm value as “management risk.” They show that management risk affects a firm’s default risk. Specifically, the spreads of corporate debts are largest around the CEO turnover and decline when this uncertainty decreases. The management risk decreases as CEO tenure increases. First, when a generalist CEO stays longer within the same firm, his/her wealth and career path are more contingent on that specific firm. Generalist CEOs’ incentives in excess risk-taking or self-serving behaviors reduce, as there is less interest misalignment. It is also likely that as CEO tenure increases, generalist CEOs move from an innovative, progressive strategy to a more conservative operating style. Second, managerial ability and behaviors are better observed and more effectively disciplined as CEO tenure increases (Li, 2019). Therefore, generalist CEOs have less incentive to overstate their ability through excessive risk-taking or earnings management. Third, CEOs are more likely to establish a closer and stronger relationship with other employees, facilitating a better internal control system and financial reporting (Campbell et al., 2016). Last, generalist CEOs are more likely to develop a deep understanding of firm-specific knowledge and better apply their skills with longer tenures. Consistent with these arguments, Li & Patel (2019) show that the negative association between CEOs’ general experience and firm performance is alleviated by longer CEO tenure. Following this line of reasoning, on one side, I expect the negative association between a CEO’s general ability and ICFR quality is alleviated as management risk declines (measured by longer CEO tenure). However, there is a vari-ation in the timing and frequency that CEOs can change internal controls. Simons (1987) shows that firms with a more progressive and innovative business strategy change their internal controls more frequently. Johnstone et al. (2011) argue that weaknesses related to the control environment, such as management tone or competence, could be quickly remediated, implying that the areas of an internal control system related to management type or style can be quickly changed. In the context of risk taking by generalist CEOs, an internal control system could quickly become com-promised and incompatible with more diverse and risky operations when CEOs “do nothing” to the existing internal control system. On the other side, CEOs are more entrenched with longer tenure, so they are more able to change the internal controls to be compatible with their risk attitudes and opportunistic incentives. However, CEO entrenchment also increases the probability that CEOs override existing internal controls, resulting in more ICW404. Therefore, the risk-taking/opportunism reduction effect of increased CEO tenure might be offset by the entrenchment effect at some time point. The mediating effect of management risk could be nonlinear. The second hypothesis is expressed as follows: 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License XU 217 

H2: The positive association between generalist CEOs and Section 404 internal control weaknesses is weakened as CEO tenure increases. 

## 3 RESEARCH DESIGN 3.1 Variables on general managerial ability 

To examine the relationship between generalist (specialist) CEOs and the likelihood of reporting ICW404, I borrow the GAI created by Custódio et al. (2013). This index is based on a CEO’s lifetime work experience in publicly traded firms before becoming the CEO of a sample firm in a particular year (Custódio et al., 2013). This index is widely used in studies on CEOs’ general ability (Chen et al., 2020; Custodio et al., 2019; Gounopoulos & Pham, 2018; Li & Patel, 2019; Liu et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2021a, 2021b; Mishra, 2014). The GAI includes five components of a CEO’s lifetime work experience: (1) the number of positions held by a CEO (X1), which indicates the CEO’s experience in different orga-nizational functions, such as production, accounting, finance, human resources, sales and marketing; (2) the number of different firms a CEO has worked for (X2). The more different firms a CEO has worked for, the more general skills he or she could obtain. (3) The number of different industries a CEO has worked for (X3), indicated by four digit-SIC codes; (4) whether a CEO has work experience as CEO at another firm prior to his or her current position (X4); (5) whether a CEO has worked for a firm with multiple lines of business (X5). The GAI is computed by combining these five components and applying the scores obtained from the principal component analysis. 2Custódio et al. (2013, p. 7) mention, “This index captures the skills of the CEO that are transferrable across firms and industries, rather than firm-specific.” Mishra (2014, p. 394) argues, “the index also measures the lack of reliance of a CEO’s future wealth on one particular firm. Thus, the index is a proxy for misalignment of CEO incentives with those of the firm and its shareholders.” I classify the CEO of a firm-year as a generalist CEO if the GAI ranks in a year’s top one-third group and as a specialist CEO if the GAI ranks in a year’s bottom one-third group. 3

## 3.2 Empirical models 

The baseline model follows Doyle et al. (2007a) and Albring et al. (2018). Specifically, I estimate the following equation to test the hypothesis that generalist CEOs are associated with ICW404: 

ICW 404 it = ?? 0 + ?? 1GENERALIST (or GA Ii,t , SPECIALIS Tit 

) + ?? 2UNFE Ei,t -1 + ?? 3BIG Nit 

+ ?? 4AUDCH Git + ?? 5MKTCA Pit + ?? 6RESTAT Eit + ?? 7AG Eit + ?? 8LOS Sit + ?? 9ALTMAN Zit 

+ ?? 10 MERGE Rit + ?? 11 GROWT Hit + ?? 12 REST Rit + ?? 13 FOROP Sit + ?? 14 INS Tit + ?? 15 SEGMEN Tit 

+ ?? 16 LITIGATIO Nit + Year Fixed Effect sit + Industry Fixed Effect sit + ?? it (1) As predicted in H1, I expect the coefficient on GENERALIST (or GAI) to be positive and the coefficient on SPECIAL-IST to be negative. Following prior literature, the model controls for auditor and audit engagement characteristics, 2 The General Ability Index data used in Custódio et al. (2013) are online at http://jfe.rochester.edu/data.htm. Thanks to Claudia Custódio for shar-ing the updated general ability components data. Following the same procedure as Custódio et al. (2013), I compute the GAI by applying the scores obtained from a principal component analysis to standardized general ability components from 2004 to 2015. Specifically, in this study, GAI i,t =0.273 X1i,t +0.330X2 i,t +0.324X3 i,t +0.223X4 i,t +0.163X5 i,t . The index is then standardized to have zero mean and a standard deviation of one. 3 I also classify a CEO as a generalist CEO if the GAI is above the sample median of a year and as a specialist CEO otherwise. The main inference for generalist CEOs does not change. 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 218 XU 

such as prior year unexpected audit fees (Albring et al., 2018), 4 Big N auditors (Campbell et al., 2016) and auditor changes (Ashbaugh-Skaife et al., 2007). In addition, the model controls for firm size and age, as Doyle et al. (2007a) find that larger and older firms are less likely to be associated with internal control weaknesses. ICW404 are more likely for firms with existing accounting problems (Rice & Weber, 2012), financial distress (Ashbaugh-Skaife et al., 2007) and negative accounting performance (Doyle et al., 2007b). Thus, the model controls for accounting restate-ments (RESTATE), financial distress (ALTMANZ) and net loss (LOSS). I expect a positive coefficient on RESTATE and LOSS and a negative coefficient on ALTMANZ. A firm’s operation and accounting complexity also affect the likelihood of reporting an ICW404. Following Ashbaugh-Skaife et al. (2007), the model controls for a firm’s acquisition activity (MERGER) and firm growth rate (GROWTH). As in Doyle et al. (2007a), I control for whether a firm has restructuring (RESTR), has foreign operations (FOROPS) and the number of segments (SEGMENT). I expect a positive coefficient on all five variables (MERGER, GROWTH, RESTR, FOROPS and SEGMENT). I then control for the institutional ownership at the end of the fiscal year (INST). I expect that a firm with a higher level of institutional ownership is less likely to report an ICW404. In the end, I control for a firm’s litigation environ-ment (LITIGATION) following Ashbaugh-Skaife et al. (2007) and expect a positive relation between LITIGATION and ICW404. To test H2, I include the CEO tenure, which proxy for management risk, as well as the interaction between GENERALIST and CEO tenure in the model: 

ICW 404 i,t = ?? 0+?? 1GENERALIST i,t +?? 2GENERALIST i,t ×TENURE i,t +?? 3TENURE i,t +?? 4UNFEE i,t -1

+ ?? 5BIGN i,t +?? 6AUDCHG i,t +?? 7MKTCAP i,t +?? 8RESTATE i,t +?? 9AGE i,t +?? 10 LOSS i,t 

+ ?? 11 ALTMANZ i,t +?? 12 MERGER i,t +?? 13 GROWTH i,t +?? 14 RESTR i,t +?? 15 FOROPS i,t +?? 16 INST i,t 

+ ?? 17 SEGMENT i,t +?? 18 LITIGATION i,t +Year Fixed Effects i,t +Industry Fixed Effects i,t +?? i,t 

(2) Other control variables are previously defined. As discussed previously, the mediating effect of management risk might be nonlinear; therefore, I break down CEO tenure into different periods. This allows the coefficient on CEO tenure to be different between the first 3 years of tenure and subsequent years (Pan et al., 2018). 5 Consistent with H2, I expect a negative coefficient on the interaction between GENERALIST and TENURE measured by the number of years since the CEO takes office. To control systematic industry and time effects influencing a firm’s internal control weaknesses, I include year and industry fixed effects in all the regression models. I adjust standard errors for the firm and year clustering (Petersen, 2009). 

## 3.3 Sample selection 

The initial sample consists of all U.S.-accelerated filers in Audit Analytics from 2004 to 2015, with available data on Section 404 ICW. 6 The Audit Analytics SOX404 dataset includes the number of Section 404 material weaknesses for each firm and a description of each type of weakness. I include the year 2003 to calculate lag-year unexpected audit fees. Table 1 panel A provides a reconciliation of the sample construction. The initial sample consists of 39,889 obser-vations with SOX404 information from Audit Analytics. I then merge this data to the GAI computed for 2004–2015, the CEO data from EXECUCOMP, financial information from COMPUSTAT and stock returns from CRSP. I exclude from the sample (1) observations with missing CEO information; (2) financial firms (Standard Industrial Classification 4 See the Appendix for the detailed definition of the unexpected fees, UNFEE. 5 Pan et al. (2018) show that the management risk is highest for the first 3 years since the CEO takes office. I then use the median value (5 years) and ninety percentile (12 years) of the CEO tenure in the sample as cut-offs to divide the subsequent period into a middle term (3–5 years), a long term (6–11 years) and beyond (12 years and longer). 6 The sample period starts from 2004 because the accelerated filers are required to comply with SOX 404 starting the year 2004. 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License XU 219 

TA B L E 1 Sample 

Panel A. Sample selection Firm-years Firms 

Initial sample: All US-accelerated filers in the Audit Analytics SOX404 dataset during 2004–2015 39,889 6117 Merge with data on general managerial skills (GAI) for S&P 1500 firms 17,988 2316 Less: observations with missing CEO information in Execucomp (2222) (195) Financial firms (SIC = 6000–6999) and regulated firms (SIC = 4400–4999) (3844) (475) Observations with missing data for control variables (586) (63) Final sample 11,336 1583 

Panel B. Sample distribution by year Fiscal year ICW404 Non-ICW404 Total Percentage of ICW404 

2004 76 598 674 11.3% 2005 80 803 883 9.1% 2006 53 905 958 5.5% 2007 57 997 1054 5.4% 2008 26 1028 1054 2.5% 2009 13 1015 1028 1.3% 2010 14 1010 1024 1.4% 2011 17 995 1012 1.7% 2012 35 928 963 3.6% 2013 32 924 956 3.3% 2014 29 899 928 3.1% 2015 29 773 802 3.6% Total 461 10,875 11,336 4.1% This table reports the sample selection procedure (panel A) and sample distribution by year (panel B) for 2004 -2015. [SIC] codes 6000–6999) and regulated firms (SIC codes 4400–4999) as these firms have different financial structures and are subject to additional regulations (Doogar et al., 2015); (3) observations with missing data to calculate the control variables for the ICW404 model. With the restrictions above, the final sample consists of 11,336 firm-year observations for 1583 unique firms. 7 Table 1 panel B presents the sample distribution across the fiscal years. Overall, approximately 4.1% of the sample reports ICW404. A higher percentage of firms report ICW404 in the initial years of implementation of SOX404. About 11.3% and 9.1% of firms reported ICW404 in the years 2004 and 2005. The percentage of ICW404 firms has declined significantly since then. 7 Since the GAI data is available only for S&P1500 firms, the sample is restricted to the S&P1500 firms after this step. 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 220 XU 

## 3.4 Descriptive statistics and univariate results 

Table 2 compares the firm-year observations reporting ICW404 ( N = 461) to nor reporting ICW404 ( N = 10,875). There are significant mean and median differences between the ICW404 sample and the non-ICW404 sample. The mean GAI is significantly higher for the ICW404 sample (0.151) compared with the non-ICW sample (0.092). A signifi-cantly higher percentage of CEOs are classified as generalists in the ICW404 sample (36.7%) than in the non-ICW404 sample (33.3%). A significantly lower percentage of CEOs are classified as specialists in the ICW404 sample (30.4%) than in the non-ICW404 sample (33.5%). Approximately 40.1% of the CEOs in the ICW404 sample have a tenure between 0 and 2 years, significantly higher than the percentage (27%) in the non-ICW404 sample. About 24.9% of the CEOs have a tenure between 6 and 11 years, and 6.3% have a tenure of 12 years and longer in the ICW404 sample. The respective percentages are significantly higher in the non-ICW404 sample (33.1 and 13%). Table 3 provides Pearson correlation coefficients among the variables used in the empirical models. The correlation coefficient between ICW404 and GENERALIST is positive (0.014). In contrast, the correlation coefficient between ICW404 and SPECIALIST is negative ( -0.013), which is consistent with the notion that firms with generalist (spe-cialist) CEOs are more (less) likely to be associated with ICW404. However, the coefficients are only significant at the 10% level for one-tail tests. Several control variables included in equation (1) exhibit significant correlations in the pre-dicted direction with ICW404. I control for these variables in the multivariate regressions. In general, multicollinearity between the test and the control variables is not likely to be a significant issue in multivariate regressions. 

## 4 EMPIRICAL RESULTS 4.1 Main evidence 

Table 4 reports the main results on the relationship between generalist (specialist) CEOs and internal control weak-nesses. The Pseudo r-square ranges from 0.34 to 0.35 across the models. Models (1) use the GAI. As expected, the coefficient on GAI is positive and significant (0.106, p = 0.041). Models (2) and (3) examine the association between generalist (specialist) CEOs and ICW404, respectively. The coefficient on GENERALIST is 0.208 and significant at the 5% level. By contrast, the coefficient on SPECIALIST is -0.258 and significant at the 5% level. The results suggest that firms with generalist (specialist) CEOs are more (less) likely to be associated with ICW404. Model (4) uses a reduced sample, excluding firms whose CEOs’ GAI scores rank in the middle group each year. Thus, the coefficient on GEN-ERALIST directly contrasts generalist CEOs and specialist CEOs regarding their probabilities of reporting ICW404. This coefficient is 0.303 and significant at the 5% level. Generally, these results support H1 that firms with generalist (specialist) CEOs are more (less) likely to report ICW404. All models control for lag-year unexpected audit fees (UNFEE). The coefficients on UNFEE are positive and sig-nificant in all models, supporting prior-year unexpected audit fees provide incremental prediction power of current year ICW404 (Albring et al., 2018). 8 Turning to other control variables, the results indicate that firms with auditor changes (AUDCHG), financial restatements (RESTATE), losses (LOSS) and foreign operations (FOROPS) are more likely to report ICW404. By contrast, Big N auditor clients (BIGN), large firms (MKTCAP), firms with lower bankruptcy risk (ALTMANZ) and firms with higher institutional ownership (INST) are less likely to report ICW404. These results are consistent with prior literature (Albring et al., 2018; Ashbaugh-Skaife et al., 2007; Doyle et al., 2007a; Rice & Weber, 8 In additional models, I also control for lag-year ICW404 (LAG_ICW) since the prior year ICW404 could also increase the likelihood of ICW404 in the current year if the control weaknesses are not remediated in time. Untabulated results show that LAG_ICW positively affects the likelihood of reporting ICW404 in the current year (1.438, p < 0.001). The coefficient on GENERALIST is significantly positive (0.183, p = 0.068), and the coefficient on SPECIALIST is significantly negative ( -0.230, p = 0.039) after controlling lag-year ICW404. 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License XU 221 

> TA B L E 2  Descriptive statistics
> ICW404  = 1 ( N = 461)  ICW404  = 0 ( N = 10,875)  Differences Variable  Mean  Median  predicted difference  Mean  Median  Mean  t-test  Median Wilcoxon test
> GAI  0.151  -0.036  > 0.092  -0.057  0.059*  0.021 GENERALIST  0.367  0.000  > 0.333  0.000  0.033*  0.000* SPECIALIST  0.304  0.000  < 0.335  0.000  -0.031*  0.000* TENURE (Log)  1.426  1.609  ? 1.689  1.792  -0.263***  -0.182*** TENURE (0–2 years)  0.401  0.000  ? 0.270  0.000  0.131***  0.000*** TENURE (3–5 years)  0.286  0.000  ? 0.269  0.000  0.018  0.000 TENURE (6–11 years)  0.249  0.000  ? 0.331  0.000  -0.082***  0.000*** TENURE ( >=  12 years)  0.063  0.000  ? 0.130  0.000  -0.067***  0.000*** UNFEE  0.170  0.152  > -0.007  0.008  0.177***  0.144*** BIGN  0.881  1.000  < 0.931  1.000  -0.050***  0.000*** AUDCHG  0.184  0.000  ? 0.064  0.000  0.121***  0.000*** MKTCAP  6.729  6.709  < 7.687  7.533  -0.958***  -0.824*** RESTATE  0.655  1.000  > 0.123  0.000  0.532***  1.000*** AGE  2.937  2.917  < 3.003  2.996  -0.066**  -0.078** LOSS  0.401  0.000  > 0.160  0.000  0.241***  0.000*** ALTMANZ  2.925  2.736  < 4.378  3.582  -1.454***  -0.846*** MERGER  0.174  0.000  > 0.191  0.000  -0.018  0.000 GROWTH  0.078  0.056  > 0.088  0.071  -0.010  -0.015 RESTR  0.560  1.000  > 0.452  0.000  0.108***  1.000*** FOROPS  0.501  1.000  > 0.395  0.000  0.106***  1.000*** INST  0.618  0.719  < 0.688  0.766  -0.070***  -0.047*** SEGMENT  2.850  2.000  > 2.744  2.000  0.106  0.000 LITIGATION  0.373  0.000  > 0.330  0.000  0.043**  0.000** This table reports the differences between the firms reporting ICW404 and firms reporting no ICW404. *, ** and *** denote 10, 5 and 1% significance levels, respectively, and are based on one-tailed  p values when a sign is predicted and two-tailed  p values when no sign is predicted. See the Appendix for variable descriptions. All continuous variables are winsorized at 1st and 99th percentiles. 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

222 XU 

> TA B L E 3  Correlations
> ICW404  (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  (7)  (8)  (9)  (10)  (11)  (12)  (13)  (1  (15)  (16)  (17)
> GENERA -LIST (1) 0.014 SPECIA -LIST (2)
> -0.013  -0.502
> TENURE (Log) (3)
> -0.068  -0.070  0.057
> UNFEE (4)  0.074  0.073  -0.031  -0.036
> BIGN (5)  -0.039  0.055  -0.097  -0.049  0.008 AUDCHG (6)  0.094  0.009  0.005  -0.015  -0.041  -0.128
> MKTCAP (7)  -0.118  0.151  -0.207  0.016  0.004  0.256  -0.089
> RESTATE (8)  0.299  0.016  -0.009  -0.034  0.042  0.030  0.069  -0.077
> AGE (9)  -0.017  0.053  -0.121  0.005  0.020  0.039  -0.012  0.279  -0.007 LOSS (10)  0.127  0.016  -0.026  -0.101  0.031  -0.066  0.046  -0.326  0.078  -0.065
> ALTMANZ (11)  -0.075  -0.080  0.113  0.077  -0.013  -0.110  -0.022  0.069  -0.072  -0.083  -0.293
> MERGER (12)  -0.009  -0.002  0.016  0.033  -0.003  0.004  -0.009  0.014  -0.018  -0.046  -0.047  -0.035
> GROWTH (13)  -0.010  -0.030  0.045  0.062  -0.058  -0.041  0.039  0.067  -0.027  -0.152  -0.202  0.169  0.195
> RESTR (14)  0.043  0.160  -0.156  -0.120  0.088  0.081  -0.005  0.050  0.043  0.139  0.159  -0.241  0.025  -0.185
> FOROPS (15)  0.043  0.094  -0.091  -0.028  0.028  0.012  0.021  0.039  0.001  0.044  0.026  -0.027  0.023  -0.026  0.151
> INST (16)  -0.053  0.030  -0.013  0.031  0.000  0.097  -0.042  0.141  -0.012  0.096  -0.081  0.029  0.034  -0.008  0.041  0.032
> SEGMENT (17)  0.010  0.088  -0.115  -0.048  0.005  0.066  -0.004  0.151  0.003  0.199  -0.030  -0.110  0.043  -0.049  0.124  0.042  0.046
> LITIGATION (18) 0.018  0.002  -0.014  -0.019  0.002  -0.048  0.001  -0.020  0.019  -0.109  0.054  0.135  -0.004  0.040  -0.025  -0.034  -0.025  -0.167
> This table reports the Pearson correlations among variables. Correlation coefficients with significance at 1 and 5% levels (two-tailed) are bolded. See the Appendix for variable descriptions. All continuous variables are winsorized at 1st and 99th percentiles. 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

XU 223 

> TA B L E 4  Generalist CEOs, specialist CEOs and internal control weaknesses
> Dependent variable  = ICW404 Coeff.  p Value  Coeff.  p Value  Coeff.  p Value  Coeff.  p Value
> INTERCEPT  ? 0.447  0.700  0.321  0.781  0.600  0.606  0.509  0.683
> GAI  + 0.106**  0.041 GENERALIST  + 0.208**  0.044  0.303**  0.023 SPECIALIST  – -0.258**  0.023
> UNFEE  + 0.634***  <0.001  0.636***  <0.001  0.646***  <0.001  0.584***  <0.001 BIGN  – -0.379**  0.033  -0.370**  0.037  -0.387**  0.030  -0.464**  0.023 AUDCHG  ? 0.554***  <0.001  0.552***  0.001  0.552***  0.001  0.411**  0.047 MKTCAP  – -0.382***  <0.001  -0.380***  <0.001  -0.383***  <0.001  -0.425***  <0.001 RESTATE  + 2.495***  <0.001  2.498***  <0.001  2.495***  <0.001  2.401***  <0.001 AGE  – 0.055  0.742  0.058  0.751  0.048  0.716  0.082  0.777 LOSS  + 0.556***  <0.001  0.563***  <0.001  0.561***  <0.001  0.345**  0.024 ALTMANZ  – -0.053***  0.003  -0.054***  0.003  -0.052***  0.004  -0.056***  0.007 MERGER  + -0.027  0.572  -0.027  0.571  -0.024  0.565  -0.234  0.894 GROWTH  + 0.297  0.157  0.294  0.158  0.298  0.155  0.323  0.187 RESTR  + 0.067  0.301  0.067  0.300  0.077  0.274  0.228*  0.072 (Continues) 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

224 XU 

> TA B L E 4  (Continued)
> Dependent variable  = ICW404 Coeff.  p Value  Coeff.  p Value  Coeff.  p Value  Coeff.  p Value
> FOROPS  + 0.506***  <0.001  0.512***  <0.001  0.504***  <0.001  0.369***  0.005 INST  – -0.520***  0.005  -0.518***  0.005  -0.514***  0.005  -0.146  0.286 SEGMENT  + 0.035  0.117  0.036  0.111  0.035  0.118  0.032  0.183 LITIGATION  + 0.157  0.213  0.162  0.206  0.154  0.217  0.249  0.138 Industry & year fixed effects  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes ICW404  = 1 461  461  461  309 ICW404  = 0 10,875  10,875  10,875  7269
> N 11,336  11,336  11,336  7578 Pseudo  R-sq  0.35  0.35  0.35  0.34 This table reports logistic regression results of ICW404 on GENERALIST (or GAI) and SPECIALIST. ICW404 is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm has a material internal control weakness reported under Section 404, and 0 otherwise. GAI is the General Ability Index created following Custódio et al. (2013). GENERALIST is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the GAI ranks in a year’s top one-third group, and 0 otherwise. SPECIALIST is an indicator variable equal to 1 if GAI ranks in a year’s bottom one-third group, and 0 otherwise. The robust standard errors are clustered by firm and year. All continuous variables are winsorized at 1st and 99th percentiles. *, ** and *** denote 10, 5 and 1% significance levels, respectively, and are based on one-tailed  p values when a sign is predicted and two-tailed  p values when no sign is predicted. See the Appendix for variable descriptions. 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

XU 225 

2012). The coefficients of other control variables, such as AGE, GROWTH, SEGMENT and LITIGATION, have the predicted signs but are insignificant. 9Table 5 presents how management risk, measured by CEO tenure, affects the relationship between generalist CEOs and ICW404. The results in Table 5 model (1) show that the coefficient on GAI is positive and significant at the 1% level (0.292, p = 0.004). The interaction between GAI and TENURE is negative and significant at the 5% level (-0.151, p = 0.015). Table 5 model (2) shows that the coefficient on GENERALIST is positive and significant at the 1% level (0.577, p = 0.009). The interaction between GENERALIST and TENURE is negative and significant at the 5% level ( -0.278, p = 0.031). The estimation results of the control variables are consistent with the results in Table 4. Overall, the results in Table 5 Models (1) and (2) support H2 that the positive relationship between generalist CEOs and ICW404 is attenuated by CEO tenure. I also examine whether the negative association between specialist CEOs and ICW404 changes as management risk increases. Untabulated results show that the coefficient on the interaction between SPECIALIST and TENURE is insignificant (0.136, p = 0.389), suggesting that the negative association between specialist CEOs on ICW404 does not change significantly for different levels of management risk. Table 5 model (3) examines the mediating effect of management risk at different CEO tenure stages (e.g., middle-term, long-term and beyond) by including three additional dummy variables and the interactions between GENERALIST and these variables. Tenure within the first 3 years of a CEO turnover (short-term) is the reference group. The main effect of generalist CEOs is significantly positive (0.486, p = 0.005). The coefficients on the interac-tions between GENERALIST and tenure stage variables are all negative. Specifically, the coefficient on the interaction between GENERALIST and an indicator variable of CEO tenure between 3 and 5 years is -0.738 and significant at the 1% level. The coefficient on the interaction between GENERALIST and an indicator variable of CEO tenure longer than 12 years is -1.774 and significant at the 5% level. Finally, the coefficient on the interaction between GENERALIST and an indicator variable of CEO tenure between 6 and 11 years is negative but insignificant. These results show that the positive relationship between generalist CEOs and ICW404 is weaker when the man-agement risk is lower (i.e., CEO tenure longer than 3 years), suggesting that agency problems are more likely to be resolved as CEO tenure increases. Both risk-taking and opportunistic behaviors could reduce as management risk decreases. However, as CEO tenure increases, CEOs are more entrenched in changing internal controls to be more compatible with their risk taking. Alternatively, CEOs are more likely to override existing internal controls to facilitate opportunistic behaviors. Therefore, this mediating effect might be offset by the entrenchment effect at some time point. These results confirm a nonlinear effect of management risk (measured by CEO tenure). 

## 4.2 Risk taking versus opportunism explanation 

To investigate how CEOs’ general ability is associated with ICW404, I partition the sample based on two proposed mechanisms. First, I partition the full sample into a subsample with higher risk taking and a subsample with lower risk taking. Following prior literature, I use three risk-taking measures: stock return volatility, R&D expenditure and total investment (Bargeron et al., 2010). 10 Table 6 panel A compares results for firm-years with higher stock return volatil-ity, defined as firms with stock return volatility above the yearly median, and those with lower stock return volatility. Panel B compares the results for firm-years with R&D expenditure and those without R&D expenditure. Finally, panel C compares the regression results for firm-years with more investment, defined as firm-years with total investment above the yearly median, and those with less investment. I find a robust positive and significant association between 9 I also control for G-index in the regression model (1) using a reduced sample in 2004–2007 with available G-index data. Untabulated results show the coefficient on GENERALIST is positive and significant (0.430, p = 0.011 one-tail test). The coefficient on SPECIALIST is negative and significant ( -0.502,    

> p=0.007 one-tail test). 10 Stock return volatility is calculated as the standard deviation of stock returns in a fiscal year. R&D is calculated as R&D expenditure deflated by average total assets. R&D expenditure is coded as zero if the information is missing in COMPUSTAT. Total investment is defined as the sum of CAPEX and R&D, where CAPEX is calculated as capital expenditure deflated by average total assets. 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

226 XU 

TA B L E 5 Generalist CEOs, management risk and internal control weaknesses 

Dependent variable = ICW404 Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value 

INTERCEPT ? 0.734 0.532 0.572 0.627 0.413 0.730 

GAI + 0.292*** 0.004 GAI*TENURE (log) – -0.151** 0.015 GENERALIST + 0.577*** 0.009 0.486*** 0.005 GENERALIST*TENURE (log) – -0.278** 0.031 

TENURE (log) ? -0.156** 0.037 -0.075 0.397 

GENERALIST*TENURE (3–5 years) ? -0.738*** 0.010 

TENURE (3–5 years) ? 0.200 0.265 

GENERALIST*TENURE (6–11 years) ? -0.099 0.733 

TENURE (6–11 years) ? -0.183 0.324 

GENERALIST*TENURE (>= 12 years) ? -1.774** 0.022 

TENURE ( > = 12 years) ? -0.219 0.400 UNFEE + 0.623*** <0.001 0.625*** <0.001 0.624*** <0.001 BIGN – -0.395** 0.027 -0.395** 0.028 -0.388** 0.031 AUDCHG ? 0.548*** 0.001 0.545*** 0.001 0.576*** 0.001 MKTCAP – -0.377*** <0.001 -0.375*** <0.001 -0.373*** <0.001 RESTATE + 2.488*** <0.001 2.491*** <0.001 2.493*** <0.001 AGE – 0.055 0.746 0.054 0.740 0.058 0.754 LOSS + 0.524*** <0.001 0.532*** <0.001 0.554*** <0.001 ALTMANZ – -0.056*** 0.002 -0.056*** 0.002 -0.054*** 0.003 MERGER + -0.012 0.532 -0.012 0.532 -0.011 0.528 GROWTH + 0.315 0.144 0.322 0.137 0.293 0.161 RESTR + 0.037 0.388 0.033 0.400 0.029 0.412 FOROPS + 0.500*** <0.001 0.503*** <0.001 0.503*** <0.001 INST – -0.499*** 0.006 -0.501 0.006 -0.531*** 0.004 SEGMENT + 0.034 0.128 0.034 0.124 0.035 0.117 LITIGATION + 0.165 0.200 0.163 0.204 0.177 0.187 Industry & year fixed effects Yes Yes Yes ICW404 = 1 461 461 461 ICW404 = 0 10,875 10,875 10,875 

N 11,336 11,336 11,336 Pseudo R-sq 0.36 0.36 0.36 This table reports logistic regression results of ICW404 on GENERALIST (or GAI) and management risk. ICW404 is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm has a material internal control weakness reported under Section 404, and 0 otherwise. (Continues) 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License XU 227 

TA B L E 5 (Continued) GAI is the General Ability Index created following Custódio et al. (2013). GENERALIST is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the GAI ranks in a year’s top one-third group, and 0 otherwise. TENURE (log) is the natural log of years since the CEO takes office plus one. TENURE (0–2 years), TENURE (3–5 years), TENURE (6–11 years), TENURE ( >= 12 years) are indicator variables of different CEO tenures. The robust standard errors are clustered by firm and year. All continuous variables are winsorized at 1st and 99th percentiles. *, ** and *** denote 10, 5 and 1% significance levels, respectively, and are based on one-tailed p values when a sign is predicted and two-tailed p values when no sign is predicted. See the Appendix for variable descriptions. generalist CEOs and ICW404 in firms with a higher level of risk taking (coefficient = 0.408, 0.263 and 0.379, respec-tively, p < 0.05). 11 There is a negative and significant association between specialist CEOs and ICW404 for firms with high stock return volatility ( -0.426, p < 0.01) and R&D firms ( -0.345, p < 0.05). On the contrary, for firms with lower risk taking, the coefficients on the CEO type variables are insignificant. 12 The results in panels A–C strongly support the risk-taking explanation. To examine the opportunism mechanism, I partition the full sample into a subsample with more powerful CEOs, proxied by CEO-chair duality, and a subsample with less powerful CEOs. CEO-chair duality has been widely used to measure CEO power in the literature (Lin et al., 2014; Lisic et al., 2016). CEOs with more power have a higher chance of exerting managerial opportunism, for example, extracting corporate resources (Lisic et al., 2016). If the positive relationship between CEOs’ general ability and ICW404 is due to managerial opportunism, I expect a stronger rela-tionship in the firms with CEOs serving as chairpersons of boards. Table 6 panel D shows that when CEOs are more powerful, generalist CEOs are positively associated with ICW404 (0.332, p = 0.042); however, specialist CEOs are not significantly associated with ICW404 ( -0.270, p = 0.116). When CEOs are less powerful, generalist CEOs are not significantly associated with ICW404 (0.207, p = 0.102), while specialist CEOs are significantly associated with less ICW404 ( -0.281, p = 0.047). These results collectively suggest that while all CEOs are likely to exert managerial opportunism when they have more power, the probability of reporting ICW404 is significantly higher for firms with generalist CEOs, which supports the opportunism explanation for generalist CEOs. By contrast, managerial opportunism cannot explain the negative association between specialist CEOs and ICW404. That is, specialist CEOs are also likely to engage in opportunistic self-serving behaviors when they have the opportunity. Thus, they are not significantly associated with less ICW404 when they have more power. These results are interesting since they imply the mechanism through which that CEOs’ general ability is associated with ICW404 might be different for generalist CEOs from specialist CEOs. 

## 4.3 Different types of ICW404 

To investigate the relationship between generalist (specialist) CEOs and different types of ICW404, I classify ICW404 based on severity and underlying reasons. Following the prior literature (e.g., Doyle et al., 2007b; Campbell et al., 2016; Albring et al., 2018), I first partition ICW404 into company-wide (ICW_COMP) and account-specific weaknesses (ICW_ACC) based on their disclosure in Audit Analytics. 13 Table 7 panel A reports the estimation results of company-11 Untabulated results show this positive relation is weaker when CEO tenure is longer (coefficients on GENERALIST*TENURE = - 0.404, -0.376 and -0.434, respectively, p < 0.05). To further investigate if a CEO’s risk preference changes as CEO tenure increases in the sample. I regress risk-taking variables on CEO tenure variables used in this study. The results show that stock return volatility decreases as CEO tenure increases. In addition, firms are less likely to spend on R&D as CEO tenure increases. However, CEO tenure does not change total investment significantly. Especially, stock return volatility is significantly smaller for firms with a CEO tenure longer than 12 years compared with firms with CEOs who have worked less than 3 years. In addition, firms with a CEO tenure longer than 12 years are less likely to invest in R&D. 12 I also partition the full sample into a subsample with high R&D expenses, defined as the ratio of R&D expenses to average total assets above the median in a year, and a subsample with low R&D expenses. The results are qualitatively unchanged. 13 I follow Albring et al. (2018) to classify ICWs into company-level ICWs and account-level ICWs. Specifically, company-level weaknesses are related to entity-wide control problems such as an ineffective, nonexistent or understaffed audit committee; untimely or inadequate account reconciliations; senior 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 228 XU 

TA B L E 6 Risk-taking explanation versus opportunism explanation 

Panel A. Firms with high stock return volatility versus firms with low stock return volatility High stock return volatility Low stock return volatility Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value GENERALIST + 0.408*** 0.007 -0.035 0.425 SPECIALIST – -0.426*** 0.009 -0.103 0.299 

Control variables Yes Yes Yes Yes Industry & year fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes ICW404 = 1 256 256 205 205 ICW404 = 0 5413 5413 5462 5462 

N 5669 5669 5667 5667 Pseudo R-sq 0.37 0.37 0.39 0.39 

Panel B. R&D firms versus non-R&D firms R&D firms Non-R&D firms Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value GENERALIST + 0.263** 0.044 0.133 0.265 SPECIALIST – -0.345** 0.032 -0.159 0.210 

Control variables Yes Yes Yes Yes Industry & year fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes ICW404 = 1 283 283 178 178 ICW404 = 0 5823 5823 5052 5052 

N 6106 6106 5230 5230 Pseudo R-sq 0.38 0.38 0.36 0.36 

Panel C. Firms with high investment versus firms with low investment High investment firms Low investment firms Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value GENERALIST + 0.379** 0.015 0.004 0.491 SPECIALIST – -0.215 0.116 -0.236 0.122 

Control variables Yes Yes Yes Yes Industry & year fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes ICW404 = 1 244 244 217 217 ICW404 = 0 5425 5425 5450 5450 

N 5669 5669 5667 5667 Pseudo R-sq 0.38 0.38 0.38 0.38 

Panel D. Firms with high power CEOs versus firms with low power CEOs Firms with CEO Chairs Firms without CEO Chairs Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value GENERALIST + 0.332** 0.042 0.207 0.102 SPECIALIST – -0.270 0.116 -0.281** 0.047 

(Continues) 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License XU 229 

TA B L E 6 (Continued) 

Panel D. Firms with high power CEOs versus firms with low power CEOs Firms with CEO Chairs Firms without CEO Chairs Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value 

Control variables Yes Yes Yes Yes Industry &year fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes ICW404 = 1 187 187 274 274 ICW404 = 0 5370 5370 5505 5505 

N 5557 5557 5779 5779 Pseudo R-sq 0.38 0.38 0.36 0.36 This table reports logistic regression results of ICW404 on GENERALIST (or SPECIALIST) in subsamples. Panel A compares firms with higher stock return volatility to firms with lower stock return volatility, while volatility is defined as the standard deviation of stock returns in a year. Firms with higher (lower) stock return volatility refer to firms with return volatility above (below) the yearly median value. Panel B compares firms with R&D expenditure to firms without R&D expenditure. Panel A compares firms with higher investment to firms with lower investment, while investment is defined as the sum of capital expenditure and R&D expenditure scaled by average total assets. The firms with higher (lower) investment refer to firms with investment above (below) the yearly median value. Panel D compares firms with higher CEO power to firms with lower CEO power. The CEO power is proxied by whether a firm’s CEO serves as the chairperson of its board of directors. ICW404 is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm has a material internal control weakness reported under Section 404, and 0 otherwise. GAI is the General Ability Index created following Custódio et al. (2013). GENERALIST is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the GAI ranks in a year’s top one-third group, and 0 otherwise. SPECIALIST is an indicator variable equal to 1 if GAI ranks in a year’s bottom one-third group, and 0 otherwise. Intercepts and control variables in all regressions are untabulated for brevity. The robust standard errors are clustered by firm and year. All continuous variables are winsorized at 1st and 99th percentiles. *, ** and *** denote 10, 5 and 1% significance levels, respectively, and are based on one-tailed p values when a sign is predicted and two-tailed p values when no sign is predicted. See the Appendix for variable descriptions. wide ICW404 and account-level ICW404, respectively. Prior research suggests that company-wide ICW404 are more severe than account-specific ICW404 regarding their association with accruals quality (e.g., Doyle et al., 2007b), audi-tor realignments (Ettredge et al., 2011) and audit fees (Elder et al., 2009). Panel A shows that firms with generalist CEOs are more likely to report company-wide ICW404 (0.361, p = 0.008) and firms with specialist CEOs are less likely to report company-wide ICW404 ( -0.396, p = 009). These results confirm the results in Tables 4 and 5. However, generalist (or specialist) CEOs are insignificantly associated with account-specific ICW404. These results suggest that CEOs are more likely to influence company-wide internal control policies or procedures than account-specific control issues. Table 7 panel B documents the association between generalist CEOs (specialist CEOs) and ICW404 due to differ-ent underlying reasons. Following Doyle et al. (2007a), I classify ICW404 based on whether an identified weakness is due to staffing issues, complexity issues or more general problems. As Doyle et al. (2007a) point out, the category of more general issues includes a range of problems, and many of these problems are related to earnings management-type activities. Therefore, I also examine the ICW404 due to revenue recognition issues specifically. Results suggest that firms with generalist CEOs are more likely to report ICW404 due to staffing issues (0.286, p = 0.034) and more management competency, tone, reliability issues; insufficient or nonexistent internal audit functions; ineffective regulatory compliance issues, ethical or com-pliance issues with personnel; segregations of duties/design of controls; and journal entry control issues (Albring et al., 2018). Following Doyle et al. (2007a), I also classify the firm as having a company-level material weakness if a firm has a material weakness related to at least three account-specific problems. Among 461 firm-years that report Section 404 material weaknesses, 286 firm-years report ICWs for the above reasons and are coded as company-level weaknesses. The remaining 175 firm-years that report ICWs for other reasons and thus only have account-related weaknesses are coded as account-level weaknesses. 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 230 XU 

> TA B L E 7  Different types of internal control weaknesses
> Panel A. Internal control weaknesses by severity ICW_COMP  ICW_ACC Coeff.  p Value  Coeff.  p Value  Coeff.  p Value  Coeff.  p Value GENERALIST  + 0.361***  0.008  -0.011  0.476 SPECIALIST  – -0.396***  0.009  -0.102  0.287
> Control variables  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes Industry & year fixed effects  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes ICW404  = 1 286  286  175  175 ICW404  = 0 10,875  10,875  10,875  10,875
> N 11,161  11,161  11,050  11,050 Pseudo  R-sq  0.37  0.37  0.26  0.26
> Panel B. Internal control weaknesses by underlying reasons ICW_STAFFING  ICW_COMPLEXITY  ICW_GENERAL  ICW_REVENUE Coeff.  p Value  Coeff.  p Value  Coeff.  p Value  Coeff.  p Value  Coeff.  p Value  Coeff.  p Value  Coeff.  p Value  Coeff.  p Value GENERALIST  + 0.286**  0.034  0.118  0.259  0.207*  0.057  0.173  0.219 SPECIALIST  – -0.294**  0.044  -0.471***  0.007  -0.299**  0.016  -0.149  0.265
> Control variables  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes Industry & year fixed effects  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes ICW404  = 1 258  258  207  207  375  375  144  144 ICW404  = 0 10,875  10,875  10,875  10,875  10,875  10,875  10,875  10,875
> N 11,133  11,133  11,082  11,082  11,250  11,250  11,019  11,019 Pseudo  R-sq  0.34  0.34  0.36  0.36  0.33  0.33  0.41  0.41 Panel A reports logistic regression results of company-wide ICW404 or account-specific ICW404 on GENERALIST (or SPECIALIST). Panel B reports logistic regression results of ICW404 due to staffing, complexity, general issues or revenue recognition problems on GENERALIST (or SPECIALIST). GAI is the General Ability Index created following Custódio et al. (2013). GENERALIST is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the GAI ranks in a year’s top one-third group, and 0 otherwise. SPECIALIST is an indicator variable equal to 1 if GAI ranks in a year’s bottom one-third group, and 0 otherwise. Intercepts and control variables in all regressions are untabulated for brevity. The robust standard errors are clustered by firm and year. All continuous variables are winsorized at 1st and 99th percentiles. *, ** and *** denote 10, 5 and 1% significance levels, respectively, and are based on one-tailed  p values when a sign is predicted and two-tailed  p values when no sign is predicted. See the Appendix for variable descriptions. 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

XU 231 

general control problems (0.207, p = 0.057). 14 Specialist CEOs are less likely to be associated with ICW404 related to staffing ( -0.294, p = 0.044), complexity ( -0.471, p = 0.007) or more general control problems ( -0.299, p = 0.016). However, CEO type is not significantly associated with ICW404 related to revenue recognition problems, suggesting that CEOs are usually responsible for general internal control issues and other managers are accountable for control issues related to specific accounting problems. 

## 4.4 Endogeneity issues 

The primary analyses in Tables 4 and 5 might be vulnerable to two types of endogeneity issues: selection bias and correlated omitted variables. I employ two methods to alleviate the endogeneity issues: propensity score matching and changes analyses. I follow Mishra (2014) to implement the propensity score matching procedure. I first estimate a probit model by regressing the likelihood of selecting a generalist CEO versus a specialist CEO on several firm charac-teristics. 15 There are 3793 firm-years with a generalist CEO and 3785 firm-years with a specialist CEO. Untabulated results show that firms with larger size (MKTCAP), higher leverage (DEBT/AT), more R&D expense (R&D/AT) and sev-eral lines of business (CONGLOMERATE) are more likely to appoint a generalist CEO. The coefficients on independent variables are all positive and significant at the 0.01 level. Then I compute the propensity scores for all observations. Finally, each firm that selects a generalist CEO in a particular year is matched to a firm that selects a specialist CEO and has the closest propensity score in the same year without replacement. The caliper is set to 0.01. Following this procedure, I have 2447 matched pairs. Untabulated results show that the mean differences between the generalist CEO sample and the matched specialist CEO sample in firm size, leverage, R&D expense and firm complexity are insignificant, suggesting an effective match-ing. Although the propensity to appoint a generalist CEO for the treatment sample is insignificantly different from the control sample, the probability of reporting ICW404 for the generalist CEO sample is significantly higher than that of the control sample. The mean difference is 0.014, which is significant at the 5% level. Table 8 reports the estima-tion results using this matched sample. Consistent with Tables 4 and 5, generalist CEOs are positively and significantly associated with ICW404. The coefficient on GAI is 0.134 and significant at the 5% level. The coefficient on GENERAL-IST is 0.277 ( p = 0.064) in model (2) and 0.916 ( p = 0.011) in model (3). This positive relationship is weakened as the management risk decreases, evident by a negative and significant coefficient on the interaction ( -0.483, p = 0.022) in the model (3). Next, I perform changes analyses by regressing change in ICW404 (CHICW404) on change in GAI (CHGAI) or change in CEO type. There are three situations regarding the change in ICW404: (1) non-ICW404 to ICW404, (2) ICW404 to non-ICW404 and (3) no change. Table 9 reports the multinomial regression results with no change in internal control reporting as the reference group. I identify 364 firm-year observations whose CEOs change from a nongeneralist to a generalist (CHGEN is coded as one) and 281 firm-years whose CEOs change from a generalist to a nongeneralist (CHGEN is coded as zero). Among these firm-years, 11 firms report effective internal controls in the prior years and ICW404 in the current years, while 21 firms report ICW404 in the prior years and effective internal controls in the current years. Panel A shows positive and significant coefficients on CHGAI (1.262, p = 0.001) and CHGEN (1.046, p = 0.058) in the regressions of a deteriorated ICFR (CHICW404 = 1), suggesting that when general managerial ability increases or the CEO type changes from a nongeneralist to a generalist, the likelihood of a deterio-rated ICFR also increases. To further mitigate the reverse-causality issue, I remove observations with ICW404 in the 14 Untabulated results show that when comparing firms with generalist CEOs and firms with specialist CEOs only, generalist CEOs are positively and significantly related to ICW404 due to complexity. 15 The probit model used to estimate the likelihood of appointing a generalist CEO is: GENERALIST i,t =a0+a1 MKTCAP i,t +a2 DEBT/AT i,t +a3 R&D/AT i,t +a4CONGLOMERATE +Industry Fixed Effects it +eit MKTCAP is the log of the firm’s market capitalization measured by share price multiplied by shares outstand-ing; DEBT/AT is the book value of long-term debt plus debt in current liabilities divided by total assets; R&D/AT is R&D expense divided by total assets; CONGLOMERATE equals 1 if a firm has several lines of business. 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 232 XU 

TA B L E 8 Propensity score matching 

Dependent Variable = ICW404 Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value 

INTERCEPT ? -2.076* 0.059 -2.253** 0.039 -1.950* 0.092 

GAI + 0.134** 0.042 GENERALIST + 0.277* 0.064 0.916** 0.011 GENERALIST*TENURE – -0.483** 0.022 

TENURE ? -0.030 0.865 UNFEE + 0.731*** <0.001 0.738*** <0.001 0.728*** <0.001 BIGN – 0.070 0.569 0.086 0.584 0.014 0.514 AUDCHG ? 0.419 0.109 0.417 0.110 0.432* 0.100 MKTCAP – -0.464*** <0.001 -0.461*** <0.001 -0.445*** <0.001 RESTATE + 2.466*** <0.001 2.472*** <0.001 2.465 <0.001 AGE – 0.171 0.899 0.173 0.901 0.168 0.897 LOSS + 0.293 0.107 0.306* 0.095 0.252 0.136 ALTMANZ – -0.001 0.489 -0.002 0.475 -0.011 0.348 MERGER + -0.123 0.707 -0.115 0.694 -0.115 0.691 GROWTH + -0.015 0.513 -0.013 0.511 0.048 0.541 RESTR + 0.168 0.193 0.173 0.184 0.110 0.286 FOROPS + 0.237* 0.090 0.245* 0.083 0.216 0.112 INST – -0.141 0.338 -0.140 0.339 -0.118 0.362 SEGMENT + 0.061* 0.072 0.062* 0.068 0.062* 0.071 LITIGATION + 0.338 0.125 0.349 0.119 0.336 0.127 Industry fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Year fixed effects Yes Yes Yes ICW404 = 1 197 197 197 ICW404 = 0 4697 4697 4697 

N 4894 4894 4894 Pseudo R-sq 0.35 0.35 0.36 This table reports the regression results using a matched sample from propensity score matching. The propensity scores are calculated by first estimating the following probit model: GENERALIST i,t = a0 + a1 MKTCAP i,t + a2 DEBT/AT i,t + a3 R&D/AT i,t 

+ a4 CONGLOMERATE i,t + Industry Fixed Effects i,t + ei,t . ICW404 is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm has a material internal control weakness reported under Section 404, and 0 otherwise. GAI is the General Ability Index created following Custódio et al. (2013). GENERALIST is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the GAI ranks in a year’s top one-third group, and 0 otherwise. SPECIALIST is an indicator variable equal to 1 if GAI ranks in a year’s bottom one-third group, and 0 otherwise. MKTCAP is the log of the firm’s market capitalization measured by share price multiplied by shares outstanding. DEBT/AT is book value of long-term debt plus debt in current liabilities divided by total assets. R&D/AT is R&D expense divided by total assets. CONGLOMERATE equals 1 if a firm has several lines of business. For each firm that selects a generalist CEO in a particular year, I match it to a firm that selects a specialist CEO and has the closest propensity score in the same year without replacement and the caliper is set to 0.01. Following this procedure, there are 2447 matched pairs. The robust standard errors clustered by firm and by year. All continuous variables are winsorized at 1st and 99th percentiles. *, ** and *** denote 10, 5 and 1% significance levels, respectively, and are based on one-tailed p values when a sign is predicted and two-tailed p values when no sign is predicted. See the Appendix for variable descriptions. 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License XU 233 

TA B L E 9 Change in general managerial ability 

Panel A. Change in generalist CEO CHICW404 = 1 CHICW404 = - 1Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value CHGAI + 1.262*** 0.001 – 0.456 0.851 CHGEN + 1.046* 0.058 – 0.051 0.468 

Control variables Yes Industry & year fixed effects Yes CHICW404 = 1 11 CHICW404 = - 1 21 CHICW404 = 0 613 Pseudo R-sq 0.70 

Panel B. Chang in specialist CEO CHICW404 = 1 CHICW404 = - 1Coeff. p Value Coeff. p Value CHSPEC – -0.184 0.331 + 1.198** 0.029 

Control Variables Yes Industry & year fixed effects Yes CHICW404 = 1 13 CHICW404 = - 1 16 CHICW404 = 0 486 Pseudo R-sq 0.70 Panel A reports the estimation results of multinomial logistic regressions of change in ICW404 (CHICW404) on change in in GAI (CHGAI) or change in generalist CEOs (CHGEN). Panel B reports the estimation results of the multinomial logistic regres-sion of change in ICW404 (CHICW404) on change in specialist CEOs (CHSPEC). ICW404 is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm has a material internal control weakness reported under Section 404, and 0 otherwise. GAI is the General Ability Index created following Custódio et al. (2013). GENERALIST is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the GAI ranks in a year’s top one-third group, and 0 otherwise. SPECIALIST is an indicator variable equal to 1 if GAI ranks in a year’s bottom one-third group, and 0 otherwise. Intercepts and control variables in all regressions are untabulated for brevity. The robust standard errors clustered by firm and year. All continuous variables are winsorized at 1st and 99th percentiles. *, ** and *** denote 10, 5 and 1% significance levels, respectively, and are based on one-tailed p values when a sign is predicted and two-tailed p values when no sign is predicted. See the Appendix for variable descriptions. prior years so CEO style change in the current year is not due to ineffective internal controls in the prior years. Untab-ulated results show that the coefficient on CHGEN is still significantly positive in the reduced sample, suggesting that it is changing from a nongeneralist CEO to a generalist CEO that leads to new ICW404, not vice versa. Table 9 panel B reports multinomial regression results of change in ICW404 reporting on change in specialist CEOs. There are 213 firm-year observations whose CEOs change from a nonspecialist to a specialist (CHSPEC is coded as one) and 302 observations whose CEOs change from a specialist to a nonspecialist (CHSPEC is coded as zero). Among these firm-years, 13 firms report effective internal controls in the prior years and ICW404 in the current years, while 16 firms report ICW404 in the prior years and effective internal controls in the current years. As expected, panel B shows a positive and significant coefficient on CHSPEC (1.198, p = 0.029) in the regression of an improved ICFR (CHICW404 = - 1), implying that when the CEO type changes from a nonspecialist to a specialist, the likelihood of 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 234 XU 

an improved ICFR increases. In summary, Tables 8 and 9 support a robust positive (negative) association between generalist (specialist) CEOs and ICW404, controlling for endogeneity issues. 

## 4.5 Subsample analyses 

I repeat the main analyses in subsamples of Big N auditor clients, restructuring firms, firms with M&A activities and firms with high bankruptcy risk (indicated by the bottom one-third of Altman Z-score). Prior studies suggest that gen-eral managerial skills are more demanded in firms with special situations, such as restructuring, M&A activities and operational or financial distress (Custódio et al., 2013; Mishra, 2014). Firms with operational complexity and financial distress are more likely to report ICW404 (Ashbaugh-Skaife et al., 2007; Campbell et al., 2016; Albring et al., 2018). Untabulated results show that the coefficient on GENERALIST is significantly positive in all subsamples except for M&A firms, while the coefficient on SPECIALIST is significantly negative in all subsamples. The magnitude of coeffi-cients on GENERALIST is larger for the subsample of Big N client firms (0.262), restructuring firms (0.440) or firms with high bankruptcy risk (0.334) compared with the coefficients for the full sample regressions. The magnitude of coefficients on SPECIALIST is larger for the subsample of Big N firms ( -0.351), restructuring firms ( -0.478), firms with M&A activities ( -0.881) or firms with high bankruptcy risk ( -0.512) compared with the coefficients for the full sample regressions. These results indicate that the association between CEO type and ICW404 is larger for Big N clients and the firms experiencing special situations. 

## 4.6 GAI component analysis 

This analysis replaces the composite index GAI with its components in the regression model (1). Untabulated results show that only the dummy variable indicating whether a CEO has work experience as the CEO at another firm prior to his or her current position (X4) has a positive and significant coefficient (0.519, p < 0.001). I also rerun the regres-sion model (1) with each component at one time. The results are qualitatively similar. The coefficients on the number of positions (X1), the number of firms (X2) and the number of industries a CEO has worked for (X3) are positive, as expected, but insignificant. The coefficient on the dummy variable indicating whether a CEO has worked for a firm with multiple lines of business (X5) is negative and insignificant. The correlations among GAI components show that prior CEO experience is correlated with the number of industries (0.429) and the number of firms (0.475) that a CEO has worked to a moderate degree. Prior CEO experience is correlated with the number of positions (0.233) and whether a CEO has worked for a firm with multiple lines of business (0.129) to a low degree. These results suggest that past CEO experience captures certain information regarding CEOs’ general ability contained in other components. Since GAI is a measure based on factor loadings of five individual components, these results suggest that GAI captures “a construct that is greater than the sum of its components” (Bentley et al., 2013, p. 805), which justifies using a composite index instead of individual components. However, one limitation of this index is that many aspects of a CEO’s general skills are not captured, for example, CEOs’ general talent skills and team- or execution-related skills (Ma et al., 2021a). 

## 5 CONCLUSIONS 

This study provides evidence that firms with generalist CEOs are more likely to report ICW404. Moreover, this positive association is weaker as management risk declines (or CEO tenure increases). In particular, the likelihood of reporting ICW404 is higher within 3 years of hiring a generalist CEO and lower in subsequent years. By contrast, specialist CEOs are negatively associated with ICW404. These results are robust to alternative models and approaches to address 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License XU 235 

potential endogeneity issues. Additional analyses suggest that the found associations are primarily due to generalist CEOs’ higher risk taking, which results in more internal control problems. Drawing from the Upper Echelons Theory, this study contributes to the research on internal control reporting by documenting CEO type as an additional determinant of ICFR quality. It highlights the importance of investors, auditors or regulators considering the CEO’s career experience and operating style when assessing a firm’s internal control environment. It also adds to the literature on CEOs’ general ability by documenting the cost of hiring generalist CEOs regarding ICFR quality. Given the popularity of generalist CEOs in the executive labor market, this study has a practical implication for CEO hire. Specifically, in addition to the benefits and firm value that a generalist CEO might gener-ate, the boards and shareholders should also consider the possible impact on a firm’s internal control quality when appointing a generalist CEO. There are several limitations of this study. First, this study does not examine the general managerial ability of other key executives, such as CFOs, who could also affect a firm’s internal control quality. Future research may consider investigating the effect of different executives. Second, GAI does not capture many other aspects of a CEO’s general ability, for example, team-related or execution-related skills (Ma et al., 2021a). However, these skills might affect a CEO’s ability to influence a firm’s internal control system. Future research may consider improving this measure. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

I thank Claudia Custódio, Miguel A. Ferreira and Pedro Matos for generously sharing their data. I also thank Catherine Shakespeare (Editor), one anonymous reviewer, Susan Albring, Randy Elder, Linna Shi, Huichi Huang and review-ers and participants of 2020 American Accounting Association Spark Meeting, 2020 American Accounting Association Annual Meeting for their helpful comments. 

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

The GAI used in this study is shared by Claudia Custódio, Miguel A. Ferreira and Pedro Matos. Other data that support the findings of this study are from subscription-based databases accessed through Wharton Research Data Services. Restrictions apply to the availability of these data, which are available from the author upon permission of the data providers. 

ORCID 

Xiaolu Xu  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0742-7424 

REFERENCES 

Albring, S. M., Elder, R. J., & Xu, X. (2018). Unexpected fees and the prediction of material weaknesses in internal control over financial reporting. Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance , 33 (4), 485–505. Ali, A., & Zhang, W. (2015). CEO tenure and earnings management. Journal of Accounting and Economics , 59 , 60–79. Altman, E. (1968). Financial ratios, discriminant analysis and the prediction of corporate bankruptcy. Journal of Finance , 23 (4), 589–610. Andreou, P. C., Karasamani, I., Louca, C., & Ehrlich, D. (2017). The impact of managerial ability on crisis-period corporate investment. Journal of Business Research , 79 , 107–122. Armstrong, C. S., Larcker, D. F., Ormazabai, G., & Taylor, D. J. (2013). The relation between equity incentives and misreporting: The role of risk-taking incentives. Journal of Financial Economics , 109 (2), 327–350. Ashbaugh-Skaife, H., Collins, D. W., Kinney, W. R., & LaFond, R. (2009). The effect of SOX internal control deficiencies on firm risk and cost of equity. Journal of Accounting Research , 47 (1), 1–43. Ashbaugh-Skaife, H., Collins, D., & Kinney, W. (2007). The discovery and consequences of internal control deficiencies prior to SOX-mandated audits. Journal of Accounting and Economics , 44 (1-2), 166–192. Bargeron, L. L., Lehn, K. M., & Zutter, C. J. (2010). Sarbanes-Oxley and corporate risk-taking. Journal of Accounting and Economics , 49 , 34–52. Becker, G. (1962). Investment in human capital: A theoretical analysis. Journal of Political Economy , 70 (5), 9–49. Bentley, K. A., Omer, T. C., & Sharp, N. Y. (2013). Business strategy, financial reporting irregularities, and audit effort. 

Contemporary Accounting Research , 30 (2), 780–817. 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 236 XU 

Bentley-Goode, K. A., Newton, N. J., & Thompson, A. M. (2017). Business strategy, internal control over financial reporting, and audit reporting quality. Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory , 36 (4), 49–69. Bergstresser, D., & Philippon, T. (2006). CEO incentives and earnings management. Journal of Financial Economics , 80 (3), 511– 529. Brockman, P., Lee, H. S., & Salas, J. M. (2016). Determinants of CEO compensation: Generalist-specialist versus insider-outsider attributes. Journal of Corporate Finance , 39 , 53–77. Burns, N., & Kedia, S. (2006). The impact of performance-based compensation on misreporting. Journal of Financial Econmics ,

79 (1), 35–67. Campbell, S., Li, Y., Yu, J., & Zhang, Z. (2016). The impact of occupational community on the quality of internal control. Journal of Business Ethics , 139 , 271–285. Chalmers, K., Hay, D., & Khlif, H. (2019). Internal control in accounting research. Journal of Accounting Literature , 42 , 80–103. Chen, G., Huang, S., Meyer-Doyle, P., & Mindruta, D. (2021). Generalist versus specialist CEOs and acquisitions: Two-sided matching and the impact of CEO characteristics on firm outcomes. Strategic Management Journal , 42 (6), 1184–1214. Chen, J., Liu, X., Song, W., & Zhou, S. i. (2020). General managerial skills and corporate social responsibility. Journal of Empirical Finance , 55 , 43–59. Cheng, Q., & Warfield, T. D. (2005). Equity incentives and earnings management. The Accounting Review , 80 (2), 441–476. Church, B. K., & Schneider, A. (2016). The impact of section 302 and 404(b) internal control disclosures on prospective investors’ judgements and decisions: An experimental study. International Journal of Auditing , 20 , 175–185. Costello, A., & Wittenberg-Moerman, R. (2011). The impact of financial reporting quality on debt contracting: Evidence from internal control weakness reports. Journal of Accounting Research , 49 (1), 97–136. Cunat, V., & Guadalupe, M. (2009a). Executive compensation and competition in the banking and financial sectors. Journal of Banking and Finance , 33 , 495–504. Cunat, V., & Guadalupe, M. (2009b). Globalization and the provision of incentives inside the firm: The effect of foreign competition. Journal of Labor Economics , 27 , 179–212. Custódio, C., Ferreira, M. A., & Matos, P. (2013). Generalists versus specialists: Lifetime work experience and chief executive officer pay. Journal of Financial Economics , 108 , 471–492. Custódio, C., Ferreira, M. A., & Matos, P. (2019). Do general managerial skills spur innovation? Management Science , 65 (2), 459– 476. DeFond, M., Raghunandan, K., & Subramanyam, K. (2002). Do non-audit services impair auditor independence? Evidence from going concern opinions. Journal of Accounting Research , 40 (September), 1247–1274. Dhaliwal, D., Hogan, C., Trezevant, R., & Wilkins, M. (2011). Internal control disclosures, monitoring, and the cost of debt. The Accounting Review , 86 (4), 1131–1156. Dong, Z., Wang, C., & Xie, F. (2010). Do executive stock options induce excessive risk taking? Journal of Banking & Finance , 34 (1), 2518–2529. Doogar, R., Sivadasan, P., & Solomon, I. (2015). Audit fee residuals: Costs or rents? Review of Accounting Studies , 20 , 1247–1286. Doyle, J., Ge, W., & McVay, S. (2007a). Determinants of weakness in internal control over financial reporting. Journal of Accounting and Economics , 44 (1-2), 193–223. Doyle, J., Ge, W., & McVay, S. (2007b). Accruals quality and internal control over financial reporting. The Accounting Review ,

82 (5), 1141–1170. Eisfeldt, A. L., & Papanikolaou, D. (2013). Organization capital and the cross-section of expected returns. The Journal of Finance ,

68 (4), 1365–1406. Elder, R., Zhang, Y., Zhou, J., & Zhou, N. (2009). Internal control weaknesses and client risk management. Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance , 24 (4), 643–579. Ettredge, M., Heintz, J., Li, C., & Scholz, S. (2011). Auditor realignments accompanying implementation of SOX 404 reporting requirements. Accounting Horizons , 25 (1), 17–39. Foster, B., Ornstein, W., & Shastri, T. (2007). Audit costs, material weaknesses under SOX section 404. Managerial Auditing Journal , 22 (7), 661–673. Francis, J., Reichelt, K., & Wang, D. (2005). The pricing of national and city-specific reputations for industry expertise in the U.S. audit market. The Accounting Review , 80 (1), 113–136. Gounopoulos, D., & Pham, H. (2018). Specialist CEOs and IPO survival. Journal of Corporate Finance , 48 , 217–243. Haisilip, J., Masli, A., Richardson, V. J., & Watson, M. W. (2015). External reputational penalties for CEOs and CFOs following information technology material weaknesses. International Journal of Accounting Information System , 17 , 1–15. Hambrick, D. C., & Mason, P. A. (1984). Upper echelons: The organization as a reflection of its top managers. Academy of Management Review , 9(2), 193–206. He, G. (2015). The effect of CEO inside debt holdings on financial reporting quality. Review of Accounting Studies , 20 , 501–536. Heflin, F., Kwon, S. S., & Wild, J. J. (2002). Accounting choices: Variation in managerial opportunism. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting , 29 (7 & 8), 1047–1078. 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License XU 237 

Hoitash, R., Hoitash, U., & Bedard, J. (2008). Internal control quality and audit pricing under the sarbanes-oxley act. Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory , 27 (1), 105–126. Hsu, A. W.-H., & Liao, C.-H. (2012). Do compensation committees pay attention to section 404 opinions of the sarbanes-oxley act? Journal of Business, Finance & Accounting , 39 (9 & 10), 1240–1271. Hubbard, R. G., & Palia, D. (1995). Executive pay and performance: Evidence from the U.S. banking industry. Journal of Financial Economics , 39 (1), 105–130. Ittonen, K. (2010). Investor reactions to disclosures of material internal control weaknesses. Managerial Auditing Journal , 25 (3), 259–268. Johnstone, K., Li, C., & Rupley, K. H. (2011). Changes in corporate governance associated with the revelation of internal control material weaknesses and their subsequent remediation. Contemporary Accounting Research , 28 (1), 331–383. Kim, J., Yong, B., & Zhang, L. (2011). Internal control weaknesses and bank loan contracting: Evidence from SOX section 404 disclosures. The Accounting Review , 86 (4), 1157–1188. Krishnan, J. (2005). Audit committee quality and internal control: An empirical analysis. The Accounting Review , 80 (2), 649–675. Lai, S.-M. (2019). Internal control quality and relationship-specific investments by suppliers and customers. Journal of Business, Finance & Accounting , 46 (9-11), 1097–1122. Li, C., Sun, L., & Ettredge, M. (2010). Financial executive qualifications, financial executive turnover, and adverse SOX 404 opinions. Journal of Accounting and Economics , 50 , 93–110. Li, M. (2019). Moral hazard and internal discipline: Theory and evidence. The Accounting Review , 94 (4), 365–400. Li, M., & Patel, P. C. (2019). Jack of all, master of all? CEO generalist experience and firm performance. The Leadership Quarterly ,

30 (3), 320–334. Lin, Y.-C., Wang, Y.-C., Chiou, J.-R., & Huang, H.-W. (2014). CEO characteristics and internal control quality. Corporate Governance: An international review , 22 (1), 24–42. Lisic, L. L., Neal, T. L., Zhang, I. X., & Zhang, Y. (2016). CEO power, internal control quality and audit committee effectiveness in substance versus in form. Contemporary Accounting Research , 33 (3), 1199–1237. Liu, C., Shi, W., & Wei, K. C. (2021). CEO expertise and the design of compensation contracts: Evidence from generalist versus specialist CEOs. Journal of Management Accounting Research , 33 (3), 97–119. Ma, Z., Ruan, L., Wang, D., & Zhang, H. (2021a). Generalist CEOs and credit rating. Contemporary Accounting Research , 38 (2), 1009–1036. Ma, Z., Wang, R., & Zhou, K. (2021b). Generalist CEOs and audit pricing. Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory , 40 (4), 123–147. Miles, R. E., & Snow, C. C. (1978). Organizational strategy, structure and process . New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. Miles, R. E., & Snow, C. C. (2003). Organizational strategy, structure, and process . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. Mishra, D. R. (2014). The dark side of CEO ability: CEO general managerial skills and cost of equity capital. Journal of Corporate Finance , 29 , 390–409. Murphy, K. J., & Zabojnik, J. (2004). CEO pay and appointments: A market-based explanation for recent trends. American Economic Review , 94 (2), 192–196. Murphy, K. J., & Zabojnik, J. (2007). Managerial capital and the market for CEOs. Unpublished working paper. University of Southern California. Naiker, V., & Sharma, D. (2009). Former audit partners on the audit committee and internal control deficiencies. The Accounting Review , 84 (2), 559–587. O’Connor, J. P., Priem, R. L., Coombs, J. E., & Gilley, K. M. (2006). Do CEO stock options prevent or promote fraudulent financial reporting? Academy f Management Journal , 49 (3), 483–500. Pan, Y., Wang, T. Y., & Weisbach, M. S. (2018). How management risk affects corporate debt. The Review of Financial Studies ,

31 (9), 3491–3531. Petersen, M. (2009). Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Comparing approaches. Review of Financial Studies ,

22 (1), 435–480. Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB). AS 2110: Identifying and assessing risks of material misstatement. Washington, D.C. Raghunandan, K., & Rama, D. (2006). SOX section 404 material weakness disclosures and audit fees. Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory , 25 (1), 99–114. Rice, S., & Weber, D. (2012). How effective is internal control reporting under SOX 404? Determinants of the (non-) disclosure of existing material weaknesses. Journal of Accounting Research , 50 (3), 811–843. Schneider, A., Gramling, A., Hermanson, D., & Ye, Z. (2009). A review of academic literature on internal control reporting under SOX. Journal of Accounting Literature , 28 , 1–46. Simons, R. (1987). Accounting control systems and business strategy: An empirical analysis. Accounting, Organizations and Society , 12 (4), 357–374. Skaife, H., Veenman, D., & Wangerin, D. (2013). Internal control over financial reporting and managerial rent extraction: Evidence from the profitability of insider trading. Journal of Accounting and Economics , 55 (1), 99–110. 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License 238 XU 

U.S. House of Representatives. (2002). The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. Public Law 17-204 [H. R. 3763]. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. Ye, Z., Hermanson, D. R., & Krishnan, J. (2013). Shareholder voting in director elections and initial SOX section 404 reports. 

Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance , 28 (2), 103–127. 

How to cite this article: Xu, X. (2024). Generalist CEOs, management risk and internal control weaknesses. 

Journal of Business Finance & Accounting , 51, 209–239. https://doi.org/10.1111/jbfa.12691 

APPENDIX Variable definitions Variables used in the ICW404 model 

Dependent variable ICW404 i,t Indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm has a material internal control weakness reported under Section 404, and 0 otherwise. General managerial ability variables GAI it The General Ability Index created following Custódio et al. (2013) GENERALIST i,t Indicator variable equal to 1 if the GAI ranks in a year’s top one-third group, and 0 otherwise. SPECIALIST i,t Indicator variable equal to 1 if the GAI ranks in a year’s bottom one-third group, and 0 otherwise. Management risk variables TENURE i,t (log) CEO tenure measured as the natural log of years since the CEO takes office plus one TENURE i,t (0–2 years) Indicator variable equal to 1 for the first three years since the CEO takes office, and 0 otherwise TENURE i,t (3–5 years) Indicator variable equal to 1 for the time period of the fourth year to sixth year since the CEO takes office, and 0 otherwise TENURE i,t (6–11 years) Indicator variable equal to 1 for the time period of the seventh year to twelfth year since the CEO takes office, and 0 otherwise TENURE i,t (>= 12 years) Indicator variable equal to 1 if the CEO tenure is longer than twelve years, and 0 otherwise Control variables UNFEE i,t -1 Unexpected audit fees in year t-1 estimated as the residual from an audit fee model following prior literature (DeFond et al., 2002; Francis et al., 2005; Albring et al., 2018): 

Log (AUDFEE) i,t -1 = ?? 0 + ?? 1LOG (ASSETS) i,t -1 + ?? 2BIG Ni,t -1

+?? 3NLEADE Ri,t -1 + ?? 4CLEADE Ri,t -1 + ?? 5RO Ai,t -1

+?? 6RETUR Ni,t -1 + ?? 7VO Li,t -1 + ?? 8LE Vi,t -1 + ?? 9INVRE Ci,t -1

+?? 10 INS Ti,t -1 + ?? 11 SPECIA Li,t -1 + ?? 12 BT Mi,t -1

+?? 13 SEGMENT Si,t -1 + ?? 14 FOROP Si,t -1 + ?? 15 EMPLA Ni,t -1

+?? 16 LA Gi,t -1 + ?? 17 AUDCH Gi,t -1 + Year and industry fixed effects 

+?? i,t -1BIGN i,t Indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm is audited by a Big N auditor, and 0 otherwise. (Continues) 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License XU 239 

Variables used in the ICW404 model 

AUDCHG i,t Indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm changes their auditor during the fiscal year, and 0 otherwise. MKTCAP i,t The log of the firm’s market capitalization measured by share price multiplied by shares outstanding. RESTATE i,t Indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm’s financial statements for the prior year or the current year are restated, and 0 otherwise. AGE i,t Log of the number of years that the company has CRSP data. LOSS i,t Indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm reports net loss in the current year, and 0 otherwise. ALTMANZ i,t Altman Z-score measure of financial distress (Altman, 1968). MERGER i,t Indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm engaged in an acquisition during the year, and 0 otherwise. GROWTH i,t Sales growth rate from the prior year to the current year. RESTR i,t Indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm engaged in a restructuring during the year, and 0 otherwise. FOROPS i,t Indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm has foreign operations, and 0 otherwise. INST i,t The percentage of institutional stock holdings at the end of the fiscal year. SEGMENT i,t Number of segments disclosed in segment footnote, equal to 1 if the data is missing. LITIGATION i,t Indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm operates in an industry with high litigation risks: SIC = 2833–2836, 3570–3577, 3600–3674, 5200–5961, 7370–7374 or 8731–8734, and 0 otherwise. Additional variables used in the audit fee model Log(AUDFEE) i, t -1 Natural log of the audit fees paid to the incumbent auditor in year t-1Log(ASSETS) i,t -1 Natural log of the total assets at the end of the year t-1NLEADER i ,t-1 An indicator variable equal to 1 if an auditor is the number one auditor in an industry in terms of aggregated audit fees in a specific fiscal year, and 0 otherwise CLEADER i,t -1 An indicator variable equal to 1 if an office is the number one auditor in terms of aggregated client audit fees in an industry within that city in a specific fiscal year, and 0 otherwise ROA i,t -1 Return on assets defined as operating income divided by total assets at fiscal year-end RETURN i,t -1 The firm’s percentage stock return over the fiscal year VOL i,t -1 The standard deviation of monthly stock returns over the fiscal year LEV i,t -1 Total liabilities over total assets at the end of the fiscal year INVREC i,t -1 Inventory plus accounts receivable divided by total assets at the end of the fiscal year SPECIAL i,t -1 An indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm has negative special items, and 0 otherwise BTM i,t -1 Book-to-market ratio at the end of the fiscal year EMPLAN i,t -1 An indicator variable equal to 1 if the company has a pension or postretirement plan, and 0 otherwise LAG i,t -1 The number of days between the company’s fiscal year-end and the audit report date 14685957, 2024, 1-2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbfa.12691 by Aalto University, Wiley Online Library on [31/07/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

