# Introduction—Platforms and Infrastructures in the Digital Age

*This article was downloaded by: [130.233.35.10] On: 05 January 2024, At: 02:53*  
*Publisher: Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)*  
*INFORMS is located in Maryland, USA*  

**Information Systems Research**  
*Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:* http://pubsonline.informs.org  
**Introduction—Platforms and Infrastructures in the Digital Age**  
Panos Constantinides, Ola Henfridsson, Geoffrey G. Parker  

*To cite this article:*  
Panos Constantinides, Ola Henfridsson, Geoffrey G. Parker (2018) Introduction—Platforms and Infrastructures in the Digital Age. *Information Systems Research* 29(2):381–400. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2018.0794  

*Full terms and conditions of use:* https://pubsonline.informs.org/Publications/Librarians-Portal/PubsOnLine-Terms-and-Conditions  

*This article may be used only for the purposes of research, teaching, and/or private study. Commercial use or systematic downloading (by robots or other automatic processes) is prohibited without explicit Publisher approval, unless otherwise noted. For more information, contact permissions@informs.org.*  

*The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy, completeness, merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Descriptions of, or references to, products or publications, or inclusion of an advertisement in this article, neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee, endorsement, or support of claims made of that product, publication, or service.*  
*Copyright © 2018, The Author(s)*  

*With 12,500 members from nearly 90 countries, INFORMS is the largest international association of operations research (O.R.) and analytics professionals and students. INFORMS provides unique networking and learning opportunities for individual professionals, and organizations of all types and sizes, to better understand and use O.R. and analytics tools and methods to transform strategic visions and achieve better outcomes.*  
*For more information on INFORMS, its publications, membership, or meetings visit http://www.informs.org*

---

**INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH**  
Vol. 29, No. 2, June 2018, pp. 381–400  
http://pubsonline.informs.org/journal/isre/  
ISSN 1047-7047 (print), ISSN 1526-5536 (online)  

## Introduction  
**Platforms and Infrastructures in the Digital Age**  

Panos Constantinides,<sup>a</sup> Ola Henfridsson,<sup>a</sup> Geoffrey G. Parker<sup>b</sup>  
<sup>a</sup>Warwick Business School, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom; <sup>b</sup>Thayer School of Engineering, Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire 03755  
Contact: panos.constantinides@wbs.ac.uk, http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2728-8975 (PC); ola.henfridsson@wbs.ac.uk, http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1605-5180 (OH); geoffrey.g.parker@dartmouth.edu, http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7160-6451 (GGP)  

*Published Online in Articles in Advance: May 21, 2018*  
https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2018.0794  
*Copyright: © 2018 The Author(s)*  

**Abstract.** In the last few years, leading-edge research from information systems, strategic management, and economics have separately informed our understanding of platforms and infrastructures in the digital age. Our motivation for undertaking this special issue rests in the conviction that it is significant to discuss platforms and infrastructures concomitantly, while enabling knowledge from diverse disciplines to cross-pollinate to address critical, pressing policy challenges and inform strategic thinking across both social and business spheres. In this editorial, we review key insights from the literature on digital infrastructures and platforms, present emerging research themes, highlight the contributions developed from each of the six articles in this special issue, and conclude with suggestions for further research.  

**Open Access Statement:** This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License. You are free to download this work and share with others for any purpose, except commercially, if you distribute your contributions under the same license as the original, and you must attribute this work as “*Information Systems Research.* Copyright © 2018 The Author(s). https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2018.0794, used under a Creative Commons Attribution License: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/.”

**Keywords:** digital platforms • digital infrastructure • architecture • governance • platform scale • platform policy

## Introduction  

In recent years, there has been mounting interest in digital platforms. Some of the most valued companies—including Alibaba, Amazon, Facebook, and Google—are platform businesses with surprisingly short histories. At the same time, many long-lived companies are considering how they can adopt platform thinking to improve performance. For instance, General Electric, the American multinational listed on the Dow Jones Industrial Average some 120 years ago, has made significant investments in platforms for the industrial Internet of things. Indeed, areas such as oil production, power generation, and heavy machinery are going through so-called platformization.  

We define digital platforms as a set of digital resources—including services and content—that enable value-creating interactions between external producers and consumers (cf. Parker et al. 2016). We view such platforms as distinct from product platforms, such as those found in the automotive sector (Fisher et al. 1999). The digital platform itself does not necessarily hold physical assets in the form of infrastructure resources, nor generate value through product sales. In models such as Airbnb, the platform has little in common with previous linear value-chain models of product development. Rather, it fits a platform ecosystem model that emphasizes core interactions between platform participants, including consumers, producers, and third-party actors (Jacobides et al. 2018). In other cases, such as Apple’s MacOS, iOS, watchOS, and tvOS, digital platforms enable the building of a powerful innovation ecosystem.<sup>1</sup> In both examples, platforms exhibit architectural and governance rules that seek to balance platform control with the necessary incentives for platform participants to engage with the platform and generate value for one another (de Reuver et al. 2017, Ghazawneh and Henfridsson 2013, Parker et al. 2016, Tiwana 2015).  

Digital platforms are created and cultivated on top of digital infrastructures. We refer to digital infrastructure as the computing and network resources that allow multiple stakeholders to orchestrate their service and content needs. Examples of digital infrastructures are: The Internet (Hanseth and Lyytinen 2010, Monteiro 1998); data centers (Gandhi 2017); and open standards such as IEEE 802.11, and USB (Hanseth 2000), as well as consumer devices such as smartphones and tablets. While consumer devices can be considered “lightweight” infrastructures in comparison to the Internet, which is more “heavyweight” (cf. Bygstad 2017), it should be noted that smartphones are powerful computational and networking devices serving as infrastructures once they scale to a critical mass. For instance, consider the role of smartphones, the Internet, and geographical positioning technology in making Uber possible.  

The wide availability of digital technology has hastened digital innovation to be built on top of digital infrastructures. Indeed, easy-to-access digital infrastructure is of vital importance to create and grow new digital ventures. Just as platforms facilitate the connection between supply and demand (Baldwin and Clark 2000, Gawer 2014), digital infrastructures provide the necessary computing and networking resources. Digital infrastructures, therefore, are distinct from other types of infrastructures because of their ability to collect, store, and make digital data available across a number of systems and devices.  

Our motivation for undertaking this Special Issue rests in the conviction that it is significant to discuss platforms and infrastructures concomitantly while drawing from information systems, strategic management, and economics research. Most prior research has been developed in separate communities that rarely engage each other’s work. Going forward, it would be beneficial to cross-pollinate separate bodies of knowledge to address critical, pressing policy challenges and inform strategic thinking across both social and business spheres. In the remainder of this paper, we set the stage for such cross-pollination.  

In this Special Issue we first review key insights from the literature on digital infrastructures and platforms, which has provided a foundation for much research in this field. Then, we present new theoretical approaches and themes. We highlight the contributions developed in this Special Issue and conclude with suggestions for further research.  

## The Architecture and Governance of Digital Infrastructures and Platforms  

Digital technology architecture is of significant importance for platform businesses’ use of digital infrastructure. Compared to a traditional product architecture (Ulrich 1995), digital technology invites a different business and organizing logic (Yoo et al. 2010). Specifically, the layered architecture of digital technology (Adomavicius et al. 2008) creates a powerful basis for building platforms that span industrial boundaries. So, while Volvo’s new car SPA<sup>2</sup> platform offers scope within the confines of automaking, a digital infrastructure, such as TCP/IP, makes no distinction between the content transmitted.<sup>3</sup> In other words, a unified digital infrastructure offers broad platforms scope across industries, not merely within them.  

The architecture of digital technology can also dictate new forms of platform governance. Boundary resources, such as APIs and metadata (Ghazawneh and Henfridsson 2013, Eaton et al. 2015), along with the decision rights of platform stakeholders (Tiwana et al. 2010) significantly influence the evolution of digital platforms. Emerging in the aftermath of the gradual decline of monopoly-driven infrastructures and their privatization (see Graham and Marvin 2001, Sassen 2001), platformization benefited from the decentralization of infrastructure governance and the unbundling of its use. In turn, this encouraged the distributed and collective innovation of new technologies and services (see, e.g., Ciborra et al. 2000, Constantinides and Barrett 2014, Tilson et al. 2010).  

In this section, we first discuss digital architecture—specifically, the layered, modular architecture (Yoo et al. 2010), and its power to fuel platforms on top of digital infrastructures. We also discuss platform governance, not least in terms of providing appropriate structures and incentives for value-creation and balancing openness and control among different stakeholders (see, e.g., Tilson et al. 2010, Wareham et al. 2014).  

### Architecture  

Platform architecture has certainly received increasing attention recently (see, e.g., Parker et al. 2016, Thomas et al. 2014). Tiwana et al. (2010, p. 677) define platform architecture as the “conceptual blueprint that describes how the ecosystem is partitioned into a relatively stable platform and a complementary set of modules that are encouraged to vary, and the design rules binding both.” In this regard, the notion of a platform ecosystem rests firmly on the idea of modularity<sup>4</sup> (Baldwin and Clark 2000, Garud et al. 2003, Schilling 2000), making a distinction between the platform core—consisting of tightly coupled components—and loosely coupled peripheral components (cf. Baldwin and Woodard 2009). The design rules (Baldwin and Clark 2000)<sup>5</sup> then, serve as the means by which stakeholders in the platform ecosystem can govern their relations with other stakeholders.  

In the digital age, however, viewing platform ecosystems as purely modular systems misses out on some unique properties of digital technology. While it is useful to conceptualize the peripheral components of the platform as complementary because they provide functionality, services, or contents not offered by the platform core itself, it is also important to remember that a digitally enabled complement is not like the accessory to a power drill. While diamond drill bits complement the drill with specific functionality for hard surfaces, digital complements, such as Google Maps, are more versatile in their potential functionality.  

Additionally, digital complements are product-agnostic (Yoo et al. 2010). That is, their functionality is not predetermined. For example, when Google Maps is embedded in a physical product like a Samsung phone, it complements the platform core by making the phone more useful or attractive. However, Google Maps is also a stand-alone service. It can simultaneously be used in a variety of different ways; bundled with a host of heterogeneous devices such as desktop computers, mobile phones, and cars, and also in a variety of application settings such as Booking.com, Rightmove, and TripAdvisor. As such, digitization renders the components of an architecture product-agnostic (Yoo et al. 2010). Potentially, infinite opportunities exist for services and components to be added onto the architecture in a generative fashion (Lyytinen et al. 2018, Wareham et al. 2014, Zittrain 2006).  

The modular architecture becomes layered once digital components are embedded into physical products, extending product boundaries and organizational structures. Consider how industries are converging—moving from independent, to mutually competitive, to overlapping structures (Messerschmitt and Szyperski 2003). This convergence creates unprecedented prospects for companies to envelop others by offering the incumbent firm’s product functionality or service as part of their own. In the automotive industry, for example, original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) can consolidate the design and control of certain components with multiple digital capabilities that were formerly dispersed among suppliers (Lee and Berente 2012, Svahn et al. 2017).  

In contrast to non-digital infrastructures, digitization feeds into the ability of an infrastructure to remove any dependence on location for completing a process. As a result, it stimulates distribution of expertise across geographical and organizational boundaries (Dhanaraj and Parkhe 2006, Gupta et al. 2007). Such location-independence is creating a vast digital economy that is on a trajectory to outgrow the physical economy in a couple of decades (Brynjolfsson and McAfee 2014). Moreover, business processes that once occurred among human agents are now being executed among self-organizing, intelligent machine agents, constantly leaving and re-entering the physical world. The use of artificial intelligence and the industrial Internet of things is increasingly digitizing business processes. For example, Airbus is combining data on aircraft production with a self-learning algorithm that identifies patterns in production problems. The system matches about 70% of seemingly unrelated production disruptions to solutions used previously in almost real time (Ransbotham et al. 2017). By breaking free from geographical constraints, the digitization of a product or service also vastly expands its potential market by enabling entirely new business models.  

All of these factors have generated an abundance of data streams on consumer behavior, orders, sales, business decisions, and location of physical and digital objects. The ability to access and share this data allows organizations to draw on in-depth, and often real-time, data analytics that lead to smarter decisions (McAfee et al. 2012). The unanticipated implication of such data ubiquity is that it allows loosely coupled networks of small firms to rival the production and service capabilities of large firms by better coordinating distributed resources and participants.  

It is exactly on the basis of such increased digitization and openness that platforms emerge. As the layered, modular architecture of a digital infrastructure, a platform invites multiple external parties—such as consumers, producers, and providers of services and digital products, as well as third-party developers—to participate in interactions and the creation of new value. Consider, for example, how boundary resources, such as APIs, metadata, and software development kits (SDK) for Apple iOS, Ford Sync, and Google Maps platforms, facilitate the emergence of ecosystems based on principles of the layered, modular architecture.  

As software developers create new applications and services to be traded on application marketplaces, they attract consumers and advertisers who generate both same-side and cross-side network effects (Parker et al. 2016). Such openness promotes ecosystems based on multiple and diverse value propositions, while also serving excess rents for the platform host or owner (Adner and Kapoor 2010, Boudreau 2010, Parker and Van Alstyne 2005).  

Yet, digitization and openness also mean that components of the layered, modular architecture become easier to copy, reverse-engineer, or break. Such (sometimes) hostile strategies have manifested in varied forms including: building meta-platforms (Ghazawneh and Henfridsson 2013), jail-breaking devices (Eaton et al. 2015), and initiating proprietary platforms through open-source licensing (Pon et al. 2014). As explored by Karhu, Gustafsson, and Lyytinen’s (2018) paper in this Special Issue, Amazon’s proprietary Fire platform is an exploitation, or “platform forking,” of the Android Open-Source project’s core. Amazon not only copied the code of Android’s technical core, but also exploits Android’s suite of applications at the service and content layers in the form of complements.  

These cases support the importance of new forms of governance that would let platforms control interactions between multiple stakeholders without jeopardizing their incentives for value-creation. We turn to governance next.  

### Governance  

Tiwana (2013) broadly defines governance with regards to who decides what. This encompasses three facets: How decision rights are divided between the platform owner and third-party developers; what types of formal and informal control mechanisms are used by the platform owner (e.g., gatekeeping, performance metrics, processes that developers are expected to follow); and incentive structures. While the layered, modular “architecture can reduce structural complexity, governance can reduce behavioral complexity” (Tiwana 2013, p. 118).  

A recognized challenge in developing platform governance, however, is how “to establish governance mechanisms that appropriately bound participant behavior without excessively constraining the desired level of generativity” (Wareham et al. 2014, pp. 1195–1196). Similarly, Yoo et al. (2012) note that “organizations must be designed to manage the delicate balance between generativity and control in the platform” (p. 1400), a point also made by others (Eaton et al. 2015, Ghazawneh and Henfridsson 2013, Tilson et al. 2010). Implementing the controls necessary to achieve the dual goals of being simultaneously “stable and evolvable” (Wareham et al. 2014, p. 1196), is very much aligned to the layered, modular architecture of digital infrastructures. This is in contrast to centralized, command-and-control governance structures found in linear value chains and hierarchical organizations. It’s important to reach the right balance because governance determines whether digital innovation made possible by the layered, modular architecture will be successfully leveraged (Boudreau 2010, Parker and Van Alstyne 2017, Rochet and Tirole 2003, Tiwana et al. 2010).  

To start with, governance structures define the platform- and app-based decision-making rights of platform owners and app developers. These rights refer to the authority and responsibility for making decisions directly pertaining to the platform and/or the apps (Tiwana 2013). Second, governance relates to the various formal and informal control mechanisms that ensure platform owners that app developers are aligned with what is in the best interests of the platform.  

In other words, control mechanisms let platform owners enforce rules that reward and punish behavior, and establish best practices on the platform (Evans and Schmalensee 2007). These controls can be informal or formal and may include tasks such as gatekeeping, process, metrics, and relational control (Tiwana 2013). A platform’s boundary resources—such as SDKs and APIs—are formal control mechanisms, granting access to the platform hardware and operating system to write complementary applications or services (Ghazawneh and Henfridsson 2013). They form the foundation for a platform’s technology-based governance over third-party developers.  

Beyond technology-related issues, a platform’s governance also includes incentive structures that influence the strategic behavior of stakeholders and the monetary profits of the platform. Digital platforms tend to engage in strategic actions and exert rules and regulations over participants, that are “distorted away from pure value creation in the ecosystem, and toward actions that lead to higher platform profits” (Boudreau and Hagiu 2009, p. 170). The platform owners’ priorities, then, are to protect their own interests and secure their competitive positions while also securing the interests of producers and consumers who contribute to value-creation on the platform. To this end, a number of monetization strategies become important, including transaction fees, access fees, fees for enhanced access and enhanced curation, as well as strategies for subsidizing one side while charging the other (Parker et al. 2016). Clearly, conflict-of-interest risks can arise in this process.  

Other platforms incentivize users to directly compete with developers (Gawer and Henderson 2007) or fold third-party innovation into the platform (Parker and Van Alstyne 2017) so that consumers obtain these functionalities at no additional cost. A platform owner can also restrict developers’ access for quality-assurance purposes, an approach most commonly seen in the video game industry. Expanding the number of developers on a platform can result in congestion and crowding (Boudreau 2012), and consumers’ search costs can increase due to information asymmetry between consumers and developers. To reduce these costs, platforms might engage in centralized, “quality certification” via developer pre-screening (Boudreau and Hagiu 2009, Evans and Schmalensee 2007). Platforms can choose to screen products and decide whether they are qualified for release, a practice carried out on the iOS App Store by Apple, Sony PlayStation, and SAP. Not surprisingly, the inconsistency and lack of transparency of this process has attracted criticism from the developer community (Qiu et al. 2017).  

Another practice is imposing restrictions on stakeholder interactions. Direct interactions between producers and consumers outside of the platform, can harm the platform’s economic interests (Rochet and Tirole 2003, 2006), motivating platforms to control these forms of interactions. Restricted access is adopted mostly by platforms that also function as market-exchange owners. Boudreau and Hagiu (2009) show that TopCoder, a platform for tournament-based software outsourcing, prohibits interactions between producers and consumers to ensure that software development in the contest is a sequential and planned process.  

The disincentive structures described above resemble behavioral-control mechanisms, where “specific rules and procedures are articulated, which, if followed, will lead to desired outcomes” (Kirsch 1997, p. 217). However, as Tiwana et al. (2010) suggest, digital platforms cannot be viewed through the lens of the classical principal-agent relationship as assumed in control theory. The “role of control mechanisms then, is one of coordination rather than mitigating agency hazards, as control theorists widely assume” (Tiwana et al. 2010, p. 680).  

Additional research on collective action may be necessary to understand how governance and incentive structures can be best implemented to coordinate behavior across multiple platform stakeholders and their distinct interests (Constantinides and Barrett 2014). The main challenge is that given the openness and digitization of services and applications on platforms, as well as the competitive nature of interactions, it is difficult to collectively agree on common governance and incentive structures. This challenge may be addressed if governance is nested into a series of layers, in line with the layered, modular architecture. Such nesting would distribute responsibilities and incentives across stakeholders, with each layer dealing with similar types of issues but at a progressively larger scale, and lesser level of detail (cf. McGinnis 1999, Ostrom 1990).  

The value of nesting can be seen in the horizontal and vertical assurance problems that arise from technological interdependence. In these cases (cf. Adner and Kapoor 2010), governance is polycentric and multi-layered—they may govern consumer-consumer interactions versus producer-producer interactions versus consumer-producer interactions versus platform-producer, and so on. Each layer of interactions is governed independently from others, as long as its self-governance does not affect other layers. In this way, governance is nested to higher layers until a layer is reached where all stakeholders with a substantive interest in a collective-action problem are represented adequately.  

A number of value-based principles have been proposed to achieve such polycentric governance (Constantinides 2012), however, these still need to be adapted to the layered, modular architecture on which each platform operates. For example, the iOS platform will require a significantly higher level of nesting than the Uber platform. In fact, it has been argued that governance principles and incentive structures, along with relevant decision rights, must mirror the technical architecture of the platform (Tiwana 2013). We discuss the challenge of mirroring, as well as other themes emerging from this Special Issue, in the next section.  

## Themes Emerging in the Special Issue and Opportunities for New Research  

We now describe five themes that emerged in the Special Issue and place these into a broader context of areas where further research might be productively pursued. We refer to these themes as: the new mirroring hypothesis; platformization and infrastructureing; competition and scaling of digital platforms; blockchain as a new infrastructure and platform; and online labor platforms.  

Table 1 summarizes these themes with reference to the phenomenon, relevance, existing work, and possible research questions.  

**Table 1. Themes and Opportunities for Further Research**

| **Theme** | **Relevance** | **Possible Research Questions** |
|------------|---------------|-------------------------------|
| **New mirroring hypothesis** <br> The seminal mirroring hypothesis is challenged by platform-enabled, open interactions. Scholars can investigate new forms of relationships between organizational structures and technology architecture. | The mirroring of technical dependencies and organizational ties is an important approach to organizational problem-solving that conserves scarce, cognitive resources. This is also important for determining loose versus tight coupling between system components. | - How can new, value-creating interactions be supported without being constrained by existing organizational structures and technical architectures? <br> - How can constantly changing boundaries be governed? <br> - How does coordination happen on digital platforms? |
| **Platformization and infrastructureing** <br> Infrastructures are undergoing a process of improving the architectural and governance control points are opened through digitization. Platforms, meanwhile, are undergoing a process of infrastructureing by expanding their reach and scope into supply chain management. | This dual process of platformization and infrastructuring builds on vast networks of installed, existing infrastructures and platforms, respectively. As such, they avoid the “bootstrap problem,” or the “chicken-and-egg problem,” achieving greater and faster scaling. There are important policy implications regarding competition and data ownership. | - How do platforms and infrastructures scale on each other? <br> - How does such scaling affect innovation and competition? <br> - What are the policy implications for the network effects generated through platformization and infrastructuring? |
| **Competition and scaling of digital platforms** <br> The nature of competitive strategy is changing as businesses adopt platform thinking. Scaling is a particular system for the system lead to new ways of competing. | With the increasing number of platform businesses and traditional businesses seeking to adopt platform thinking, it is vital to understand the competitive dynamics of the output. This applies to platform owners as well as complementors, such as third-party developers, seeking competitive ways to advance their business. | - What is the strategic interplay between platform owners and ecosystem actors over time? <br> - What are the competitive moves that platform owners can use to design boundaries to surrounding ecosystem actors? <br> - How can third-party developers advance their businesses across multiple platforms? |
| **Blockchain as a new infrastructure and platform** <br> Blockchains are capable of performing trusted operations in a decentralized infrastructure. Through a consensus mechanism, parties with the right to validate new mechanisms can update the blockchain and interact directly with each other, anonymously, and without the need for central coordination. | Blockchain infrastructure holds the promise of increased speed of exchange, a reduced number of intermediaries and associated costs, improved security, digitized assets, wider access to disadvantaged groups (especially in emerging economies), and improved regulatory compliance. | - How can blockchain technology overcome existing architectural and governance challenges in digital platforms and infrastructures? <br> - How can blockchain-based digital platforms transform existing value-creating interactions? <br> - How does blockchain technology address the misaligned incentive structures and trust currently faced by digital platforms? <br> - What are the policy implications for developing “smart” blockchain contracts? |
| **Online labor platforms** <br> The shift from permanent employment to need-based outsourcing, and from local labor markets to global online labor platforms. | Online labor platforms have implications for the sourcing and delivery of services and products, but also for capital decisions and for the degree of labor specialization needed. | - How does pricing for work done on an online labor platform impact repeat engagements? <br> - How do value uncertainties about a task affect employers and freelancers on online labor platforms? <br> - How does online monitoring affect successful matching of employers and freelancers on online labor platforms? <br> - What are the training and development effects of online labor platforms for unemployed workers? |

### The New Mirroring Hypothesis  

In the 1960s, both computer science and organizational theory posited a hypothesis that the structure of a product development organization must “mirror” the architecture of the product it develops (Conway 1968, Lawrence and Lorsch 1967, Thompson 1967). The explanation is that a specific architecture is thought to imply a certain partitioning of product development tasks. Therefore, it should also determine the optimal structure of the corresponding product-development organization. The previously cited concept of modularity offers a better understanding of the mirroring hypothesis. Modularity aims to capture the degree to which the elements in a system (whether a software system or an organization) are partitioned into functionally specialized modules, or business units. These modules operate nearly independently and can be easily removed or replaced because they interact through simple, standardized interfaces, in the case of software systems (Baldwin and Clark 2000). Organizations, on the other hand, interact through standardized exchanges (Schilling and Steensma 2001).  

More recently, Colfer and Baldwin (2016) reviewed 142 empirical studies and found strong evidence of the mirroring of technical architecture to organizational tasks. However, they also found that in “open, collaborative projects” supported by new digital technologies, the mirroring hypothesis does not hold true. This is because contributors work interdependently for limited periods of time without the need to coordinate (e.g., crowdsourcing contests). Although, Colfer and Baldwin (2016) primarily focus on open-source software development projects, other types of “open” interactions—similar to those found on digital platforms—show even stronger evidence that the mirroring hypothesis does not hold true. Without such mirroring, the long-held interdependence between technology and organization tasks (Thompson 1967) is put into question; coordination is now achieved in different ways.  

Within organizations, the mirroring of technical dependencies and organizational ties is an important approach to organizational problem-solving that conserves scarce cognitive resources. People charged with implementing complex projects or processes must arrive at solutions that account for the technical constraints; that is, they must communicate with one another and cooperate to solve problems where and when they arise (Puranam et al. 2012). Across organizations, the absence of technical and organizational ties might determine, or predict, the location of firm boundaries. It means that technical systems made up of many discrete modules can be implemented by loosely coupled organizations, i.e., separate firms, while systems with many interdependencies require tighter coupling, such as those found in a single firm (Baldwin and Clark 2000).  

Previous research on system integration (Brusoni and Prencipe 2001, Ceci and Prencipe 2008, Davies et al. 2007) also has challenged the mirroring hypothesis. This research, which observed the design and construction of complex technical systems involving many firms, found that while the systems were modular (and mirrored) with respect to technical dependencies and most tasks, the systems integrator had to interactively coordinate and manage the entire network of component suppliers. To fulfil this coordination role, systems integrators needed capabilities that spanned a wide range of technical fields (Parker and Anderson 1995). As a result, their knowledge extended well beyond what was directly relevant to the tasks they performed in-house.  

This view also has been explored in academic research on the strategic manipulation of firm boundaries by the surrounding “industry architecture” (Jacobides 2006, Jacobides et al. 2006). Interestingly, it was found that technologically dynamic industries constantly change their technical dependencies and organizational ties to create new institutional arrangements (Amaral et al. 2011, Pisano and Teece 2007). Technical architectures and organizational structures, therefore, should be approached as a source of strategic opportunity, and should be dynamically changed over time.  

Although research presented in this Special Issue has not explicitly discussed the mirroring hypothesis, there is evidence to show that value-creating interactions between different platform participants renew opportunities for dynamically changing both organizational structures and the technical architecture that supports the former.  

For instance, the research conducted by Lee, Ba, Li, and Stallaert (2018) in this issue examines the performance of crowdsourcing contests on Kaggle. The authors show that despite the well-reported merits of using open contests for research and development tasks previously performed within internal business units (Boudreau and Lakhani 2013), the performance of these contests is very much dependent on in-progress feedback to the contestants. Such feedback may lead to “salience bias” among contestants—i.e., “to over-emphasize the feedback while overlooking other important information that may be helpful for them to achieve desirable outcomes.”  

What is revealing about these findings is that although open contests of the type found on crowdsourcing platforms allow an organization to break free from existing organizational structures and technical architectures, platform owners need to implement appropriate control mechanisms to align the behavior of the online community with the platform’s objectives. Although digital platforms enable an opening of their structural boundaries—both organizationally and technically—to support new value-creating interactions, such boundary openings, need to be met with appropriate governance structures.  

Beyond the openness of interactions, the digitization of platforms also challenges the mirroring hypothesis. The research conducted by Rolland, Mathiassen, and Rai (2018) in this Special Issue explores the digital options, including “the transformative capabilities afforded by digital platforms’ generative characteristics.” They examine how a Swedish media organization leverages those capabilities to further develop its use of a platform. The digital options’ concept underscores that organizations must continuously identify options worthy of exploration and selectively realize those that generate new value (Sandberg et al. 2014, Svahn et al. 2015).  

Rolland, Mathiassen, and Rai also explore digital debt; “an organization’s exposure to technical debt” (Kruchten et al. 2012, Ramasubbu and Kemerer 2016). Their research shows that the Swedish media organization was constrained by this technical build-up as it tried to align their efforts with a new digital platform. Although the media organization leveraged a number of digital options, it was constrained by its existing “digital infrastructure.” For instance, in addition to its integrating previously dispersed work systems, the platform encouraged new application development, while encouraging extraction, tagging, and transferring of unstructured data among journalists and producers by journalists.  

These findings are important because they provide evidence that the mirroring hypothesis becomes increasingly irrelevant as the digital platform evolves to provide more digital functions that transcend existing organizational structures. Rolland, Mathiassen, and Rai pay a particular attention to their role of the layered, modular architecture of the layered, platforms, as well as the “digitality” in enabling platforms that enable organizations to leverage digital options and for managing digital debt for new value creation opportunities that create new value, without becoming locked into a “legacy” systems.  

Further research could be conducted to more explicitly examine how digital infrastructures and platforms challenge the mirroring hypothesis and. Some relevant questions include: How might we support new forms of value-creating interactions without being constrained by existing organizational structures and technical architectures? How might we govern constantly changing boundaries? How does coordination occur on digital platforms?  

### Platformization and Infrastructuring  

We have discussed already discussed how infrastructures that are undergoing a process of “platformization” through by opening their architectural and governance control points are opened through digitization., as described in the study by Rolland, Mathiassen, and Rai. At the same time, we are also beginning to see the opposite effect happening: The infrastructuring of digital platforms by making them more physical in the physicality, while expanding their reach and scope of their reach into supply chain management.  

Amazon is a great example of a good example of this countereffect. It Amazon began as an e-commerce platform online retailer, but has since moved toward a multi-sided platform model that enables allows various actors—buyers, buyersellers, sellers, advertisers—and other third-party entities—such as advertisers, cloud providers, software developers—to create value through platform interactions with each other on its platform and create value for one another. Over time, it has grown so much that it has increasingly taken over a number of physical businesses with physical assets and has become involved in more traditional supply chains or “pipeline businesses” (Parker et al., 2016). For example, Amazon recently bought Whole Foods, a supermarket chain with physical assets. Together with its Amazon Prime service and AmazonFresh unit, and with a vast logistics network to rival that of FedEx or and UPS, it has developed capabilities to deliver multiple items from in the same order in on the same day. A clear strategy is underway to move into supply-chain management and logistics distribution, while expanding its digital platform strategy.  

This dual process of platformization and infrastructuring builds upon foundation the foundation of existing infrastructures and platforms, respectively, avoiding the foundation the “bootstrap problem” faced by early infrastructure infrastructures (Hanseth and Aanestad 2003; Hanseth and Lyytinen, et al 2010), or as well-known as the “chicken-and-egg problem” of early digital platforms (Hagiu and Eisenmann 2007; Parker et al., 2016). Instead, by leveraging network effects on the existing installed base, these new infrastructures and platforms achieve significant greater and faster scaling. There are also significant policy implications around competition and data ownership given the scale of these infrastructure-platforms (see below).  

Fundamentally, platformization can be viewed as a strategy for enabling operating multisided platforms and connecting buyers to buyers with sellers, without controlling or needing to own the products or services being sold, as seen in the case of eBay, Airbnb, or and others. In contrast, infrastructuring can be viewed as a strategy for operating more like a supermarket supply chain, acquiring and then reselling products and services. Multisided platforms have become very popular in recent years because they are financially more attractive to investors and less complex than supply chains to operate. Multisided platforms also typically have low operating costs and high percentage margins, because they usually take a cut from each transaction, which goes directly to the bottom line. On the other hand, supply chains typically have higher revenue, but also high capital investment costs in infrastructure—such as data centers and product warehouses, and distribution centers—as well as greater operating costs and lower percentage margins.  

The two strategies can be viewed along a continuum, seen as a continuum where companies striving to acquire more control, while also at the same time pushing for more innovation. Scale and aggregation effects become very important in this continuum (Hagiu and Wright, 2013), as they help platform owners determine when to engage in infrastructuring when to engage in infrastructuring. For example, high-demand products like supermarket items are known to sell more efficiently by one large reseller than by many small ones sellers. Also, some products and services have much higher value to buyers when bought together than when purchased separately from independent sellers. In such cases, a platform owner like such as Amazon, may choose to become a reseller, to capitalize on economies of scale in infrastructure investment investments, while feeding into more innovative products and services (Hagiu and Wright, 2013). Scale and aggregation effects thus determine the extent to which a platform owners decide to engage in infrastructuring, balancing control with opportunities for innovation.  

### Policy Implications  

#### Data Privacy  

The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) has introduced significant requirements for platforms handling user data, including:  
- **Expanded rights**: GDPR has expanded the scope of rights for data subjects, including data portability and access rights.  
- **Data breach reporting requirements**: notification of Reporting a data breach is now required within 72 hours of discovery.  
- **Data protection officers**: institutions Institutions may be required to appoint Data Protection Officers (DPOs) data protection officers to monitor compliance with GDPR regulations regulation.  

The case for such regulation and the challenge of controlling data use after collection has played out in a very public manner in a public way, as seen in the Cambridge Analytica’s use of the Facebook data scandal has dramatically shown (Seetharaman and Bindley, 2018). Although social media systems can control who initially accesses has initial access to their users’ data initially, it is much more challenging to audit their use after the fact, since as data can be combined from multiple sources, making it difficult to trace the exact origin without having internal access to the data sources. As a result, locking down data access at this stage point is somewhat like “closing the barn door after the horses have left.” If the data that was released improperly released data ages quickly, then new privacy policies can have a significant impact. However, if the released data is more permanent, such as the a list of “friends” in a social network, then improper releases will have a longer-term impact. The GDPR’s affirmation of a “right to be forgotten” right stands in direct opposition to contrast to this potential for longer-term impact.  

The challenge for both platform operators and government representatives tasked with protecting citizens’ interests is to balance what people say they want against what their actions imply about their preferences. The concept idea of a property interest in personal data can help users better understand the value of what they are giving away versus the goods and services that platforms systems provide. The EU’s proposed tax on pure data platforms, such as Google search, suggests that regulators are exploring such structures.<sup>17</sup>  

In addition to issues of data ownership and privacy protection concerns, there are increasing concerns about the impact of social media platforms on democracy. The Russian attempts to interfere with and influence the 2016 U.S. presidential election using social media has been well-documented. Less well-known is that at least 17 countries experienced election manipulation in the following year, as a report documenting election interference showed in November 2017 (Kelly et al. 2017). Despite the efforts of Russia’s efforts to influence elections in other countries, the authors note that the majority of interference was deployed by incumbent governments to suppress democracy within their own countries.  

A recent study of social media and “fake news” using a detailed database supplied by Twitter showed that false information spreads significantly farther and faster than fact-based news (Vosoughi et al. 2018). One possible reason given for this finding is that false news can be more novel, and thus generate more interest, even if it is untrue. The broader issue is that social media systems are subject to “information cascades” that can cause information to spread quickly, whether accurate or not. This phenomenon might be partially explained by the rapid deployment of machine learning algorithms that can quickly sift through mountains of data to identify patterns (Athey 2018).  

A potential solution might be to put intentional brakes into social media systems to slow the copying of messages. But such brakes would run counter to the goal of algorithms that reinforce consumer preferences by delivering “more of the same” when they demonstrate interest in a topic. Braking cascades could might be possible through self-governance, but if that fails, then some form of government regulation might be necessary. A major challenge, however, would be making regulation compatible with the U.S. Constitution’s First Amendment.  

#### Net Neutrality  

On December 15, 2017, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) voted to scrap net neutrality regulations that had previously prohibited broadband providers from blocking websites or charging for higher-quality service or certain content. The U.S. federal government will also no longer regulate high-speed Internet delivery as if it were a utility. The vote reverses the FCC’s 2015 decision during the Obama administration, which aimed to have stronger oversight over broadband providers.  

There are arguments for and against net neutrality. On one hand, the Internet Association, the trade group that represents big tech firms such as Google and Facebook, supports net neutrality because, as they argue, the internet was built as a public good, free for all to use, without restrictions. According to the “best-effort principle,” each data packet is transmitted in a content-blind manner without any discrimination (“a bit is a bit is a bit,” Faulhaber 2011, p. 18). On the other hand, however, Internet Service Providers (ISPs) like AT&T and Comcast argue that, given that some 70% of internet traffic during peak hours comes from digital platforms like Netflix and YouTube, they need to charge fees for the growing traffic to be able to maintain and improve the digital infrastructure. They argue that, if control points are not implemented, we will end up with some powerful platforms free-riding and crowding out competition from smaller platforms. This may also lead to a dying digital infrastructure—at least for poor, remote areas—as we have seen in the case of transportation and electricity infrastructures (Graham and Marvin 2001).  

New platforms and infrastructures in the digital age are built on a layered modular architecture, which, as we have discussed so far, has far-reaching implications for net neutrality and its prevailing principles. Data now flows between devices and service applications, as discussed above, exceeding pure capacity needs. This imposes new requirements regarding the quality, reliability, and efficiency of data transfer, and gives rise to new questions regarding net neutrality, beyond ISPs (Statovci-Halimi and Franzl 2013). For example, some have called for “device neutrality” (Krämer et al. 2013) to argue that neither device manufacturers nor software developers (e.g., Apple iOS, Google Android) should have influence on what content or which services can be accessed by the devices (e.g., Apple does not support Flash on its iOS devices). Thus, there is a call for new regulation on net neutrality, one that takes into account the increasing digital convergence of platforms and infrastructures (see Sedlmeir et al. 2017).  

#### Industry-Level Challenges  

Beyond the challenges observed at the four layers of the layered modular architecture, there are also disruptive challenges at the industry level. Disruption has been observed in media, lodging, transportation, and more. The concern is especially keen when platforms have ignored existing regulatory frameworks, as in the cases of Airbnb and Uber. Entrants claim that incumbents have engaged in regulatory capture, while incumbents argue that everyone needs to play by the same rules (Edelman 2015, Parker et al. 2016). One conceptual framework might come from the impact that globalization had on manufacturing industries in OECD countries in the 1990s and 2000s. Autor (2015) demonstrated that globalization had an unambiguously negative impact on the specific industries and towns where the associated infrastructure was located. At the same time, the broader benefits of global trade have also been demonstrated. The challenge is how to deal with and potentially alleviate the major consequences that small groups experience, while still allowing for the broader benefits.  

The challenge that regulators face as they try to craft a response to disruption is avoiding capture by incumbent firms that would prefer to use government authority to avoid competition. The upcoming implementation of the Payment Services Directive 2 (PSD2) highlights some of the contradictions of using regulation in rapidly changing industries. The goals of PSD2 are as follows (European Commission, 2018):  
- Contribute to a more integrated and efficient European payments market.  
- Improve the level playing field for payment service providers (including new players).  
- Make payments safer and more secure.  
- Protect consumers.  

The implementation of PSD2 requires financial institutions to provide API access to customer accounts. The goal is to facilitate the entry of entrepreneurial “fintech” firms to innovate and provide new solutions such as robotic portfolio advisory services and single-portal access to accounts held in multiple institutions. This goal can be partly viewed in the context of EU concern about the relative lack of “tech” startups, described as “Platform Anxiety” by Evans and Gawer (2016). The concern that incumbent financial services firms express is that although the goal is to facilitate entrepreneurship, the practical impact might be to create openings for incumbent technology firms (Amazon, Google, etc.) to enter financial services markets, with the possible unintended consequence of crowding out startups.<sup>18</sup> Regulators are likely to view such concerns with skepticism given the obvious interests incumbents have in protecting their markets.  

Another industry-level challenge is the potential for anti-competitive behavior by platform firms that enjoy large market shares protected by network effects and switching costs (Eisenmann et al. 2006, 2011). Search markets, for example, have drawn scrutiny from both EU and U.S. regulators. The concern is that results will be manipulated to favor platform partners. On the other hand, markets that are linked by network effects often have unique prices where certain user segments can see prices at or below marginal cost. Although this might look like predatory pricing, in reality, the firms involved are often engaging in optimal price-setting behavior. Evans (2013) argues that legal briefs that do not cite and incorporate the two-sided network literature be subject to Daubert motions for dismissal. Nonetheless, as large technology and social media platforms continue to grow, the possibility for abuse grows as well and will need a vigilant set of regulators to ensure a level playing field.  

### Recommendations  

There are a number of fruitful avenues for further research to support the resolution of the regulatory issues described above. These include but are not limited to the following:  
- Clarify intellectual property rights to establish ownership clearly. Potentially secure those rights using technologies such as blockchains.  
- Foster the debate to balance the goals of privacy against the desire for economic growth.  
- Examine whether social media should be viewed as “critical infrastructure” given their ability to influence critical societal functions such as elections. If so, what are the appropriate regulatory regimes?  
- Examine an appropriate role for government intervention in how platforms operate. Specifically, is there a role for a “platform tax” to help ease the transition of disrupted workers into new industries?  
- Assess whether platforms can regulate themselves. Is the threat of negative publicity and lost users enough of an enforcement mechanism, or is government regulation inevitable? Platform owners need to invest in research to better understand their broader impact. How might social media platforms make design changes that might reduce/prevent information cascades?  

### Conclusion and Acknowledgments  

The submission response to this Special Issue attests to the importance of the topic of digital infrastructure and platforms. Our goal was to bring forward leading-edge research from the information systems, strategic management, and economics literatures to inform our understanding of platforms and infrastructures in the digital age. We began by outlining the rich tradition of research on platforms and infrastructures based on multiple disciplines. We presented our own understanding of this research by paying attention to the architecture and governance of infrastructures and platforms. We then highlighted themes emerging from this Special Issue and discussed opportunities for further research. We are thankful for the contributions made and are confident that the issue provides a solid ground for future studies that draw on both infrastructure and platform research to address new business and social problems.  

We received 54 submissions covering a range of sub-themes. Some otherwise promising papers were screened for their fit with the objectives of the Special Issue. A total of 35 submissions went through a full review process by a community of 28 associate editors and nearly 100 reviewers, drawn from multiple disciplines and with a wide range of theoretical and methodological skills to handle both empirical and theoretical papers. The six papers published in this issue were shaped and refined by their authors with the assistance from this community. As Guest Senior Editors, we would like to extend our heartfelt thanks to this community of scholars who dedicated their time and expertise to the process.  

We would like to acknowledge, in particular, the associate editors—many of whom hold editorial positions at *Information Systems Research* and other top journals in the IS, management science, and economics fields. They have contributed substantial effort to the editorial process of the Special Issue. We would also like to thank the Editors-in-Chief of *Information Systems Research*, Ritu Agarwal, who was brave enough to support our concept in the early stages, and Alok Gupta, who has supported its completion. A special thanks to Frances Moskwa, who assisted us, the Guest Senior Editors, and the large pool of associate editors and reviewers who demonstrated great patience and understanding through the administrative processes. Thanks are also due to Paula Klein for language editing. Finally, we greatly appreciate the work of Sandor Roberts in finalizing the publication process for this article and the entire Special Issue.  

## Endnotes  

<sup>1</sup> However, most of Apple’s revenue and profit is, admittedly, realized through product sales.  
<sup>2</sup> The Scalable Product Architecture serves as a platform for the latest generations of Volvo’s XC60, XC90, and S/V90 models.  
<sup>3</sup> Yoo et al. (2010) refer to this as the separation between network and content (p. 726).  
<sup>4</sup> Modularity refers to the degree to which a product can be decomposed into components that can be recombined (Schilling 2000). A modular architecture offers an effective way to reduce complexity and increase flexibility by decomposing a product design into loosely coupled components interconnected through prespecified interfaces (Baldwin and Clark 2000).  
<sup>5</sup> Baldwin and Clark (2000) refers to design rules as a way to prevent cycling in the design of interdependent objects.  
<sup>6</sup> See http://uk.businessinsider.com/r-amazon-to-spend-149-bln-on-air-cargo-hub-fans-talk-of-bigger-ambitions-2017-2?r=US&IR=T.  
<sup>7</sup> See https://www.reuters.com/article/us-energy-blockchain/bp-shell-lead-plan-for-blockchain-based-platform-for-energy-trading-idUSKBN1D6121.  
<sup>8</sup> See https://www.forbes.com/sites/rogeraitken/2018/01/16/ibm-forges-global-joint-venture-with-maersk-applying-blockchain-to-digitize-global-trade/#1b376389547e.  
<sup>9</sup> See https://bita.studio/.  
<sup>10</sup> See https://www.nbcnews.com/business/business-news/companies-colleges-unite-train-new-collar-students-n802251.  
<sup>11</sup> https://www.commerce.gov/tags/digital-economy (accessed March 18, 2018).  
<sup>12</sup> https://www.commerce.gov/news/blog/2015/offer-commerce-departments-digital-economy-agenda.  
<sup>13</sup> https://www.commerce.gov/news/press-releases/2017/01/us-department-commerce-releases-green-paper-proposing-approach-advancing (accessed March 18, 2018).  
<sup>14</sup> https://www.ftc.gov/tips-advice/business-center/privacy-and-security/u.s.-eu-safe-harbor-framework (accessed March 22, 2018).  
<sup>15</sup> https://www.nytimes.com/aponline/2018/03/22/us/politics/ap-us-budget-battle-email-searches.html.  
<sup>16</sup> https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-authorities-get-access-to-data-stored-on-overseas-cloud-servers-1521827500.  
<sup>17</sup> https://www.reuters.com/article/us-eu-tax-digital/eu-proposes-online-turnover-tax-for-big-tech-firms-idUSKBN1GX00J (accessed March 25, 2018).  
<sup>18</sup> Disclosure: Deutsche Bank provided support for co-author Parker’s research on platforms in the financial services industry through a 2017 grant to MIT where Parker is a visiting scholar at the MIT Sloan School and a fellow at the MIT Initiative on the Digital Economy.  

## References  

Adner R, Kapoor R (2010) Value creation in innovation ecosystems: How the structure of technological interdependence affects firm performance in new technology generations. *Strategic Management J.* 31(3):306–333.  
Adomavicius G, Bockstedt JC, Gupta A, Kauffman RJ (2008) Making sense of technology trends in the information technology landscape: A design science approach. *MIS Quarterly* 32(4):779–809.  
Amaral J, Anderson EG Jr, Parker GG (2011) Putting it together: How to succeed in distributed product development. *Sloan Management Rev.* 52(2):51–58.  
Athey S (2018) The impact of machine learning on economics. In: Agrawal A, Gans J, Goldfarb A (eds) *The Economics of Artificial Intelligence: An Agenda*. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.  
Autor DH (2015) Why are there still so many jobs? The history and future of workplace automation. *J. Economic Perspectives* 29(3):3–30.  
Baldwin CY, Clark KB (2000) *Design Rules: The Power of Modularity*. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.  
Baldwin CY, Woodard CJ (2009) The architecture of platforms: A unified view. In A. Gawer (Ed.), *Platforms, Markets and Innovation* (pp. 19–44). Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK.  
Boudreau K (2010) Openness and the organization of digital innovation: Evidence from the mobile device industry. *Management Sci.* 56(10):1684–1700.  
Boudreau K (2012) Let a thousand flowers bloom? An early look at large numbers of software app developers and patterns of innovation. *Organization Sci.* 23(5):1409–1427.  
Boudreau K, Hagiu A (2009) Platform rules: Multi-sided platforms as regulators. In A. Gawer (Ed.), *Platforms, Markets and Innovation* (pp. 163–191). Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK.  
Boudreau K, Lakhani KR (2013) Using the crowd as an innovation partner. *Harvard Business Rev.* 91(4):60–69.  
Brynjolfsson E, McAfee A (2014) *The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies*. W.W. Norton & Company, New York.  
Brusoni S, Prencipe A (2001) Unpacking the black box of modularity: Technologies, products and organizations. *Industrial Corporate Change* 10(1):179–205.  
Bygstad B (2017) Generative innovation: A comparison of lightweight and heavyweight IT platforms. *Information Systems J.* 27(3):275–300.  
Catalini C, Gans JS (2016) Some simple economics of the blockchain. Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.  
Ceci F, Prencipe A (2008) Configuring capabilities for integrated solutions: Evidence from the IT sector. *Industry & Innovation* 15(3):277–296.  
Cennamo C, Ozalp H, Kretschmer T (2018) Platform architecture and quality trade-offs of multihoming complements. *Information Systems Research* 29(2):461–478.  
Chen DL, Horton JJ (2016) Research note—Are online labor markets spot markets for tasks? A field experiment on the behavioral response to wage cuts. *Information Systems Research* 27(2):403–423.  
Ciborra CU, Braa K, Cordella A, Dahlbom B, Failla A, Hanseth O, et al. (2000) *From Control to Drift: The Dynamics of Corporate Information Infrastructures*. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.  
Colfer L, Baldwin CY (2016) The mirroring hypothesis: Theory, evidence, and exceptions. *Industrial Corporate Change* 25(5):709–738.  
Constantinides P (2012) Perspectives on governing enterprise IT systems: A value-based approach. *Ph.D. dissertation*, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.  
Constantinides P, Barrett M (2014) Information systems as infrastructures for collective action: A case study of open mHealth. *Information and Organization* 24(4):233–462.  
Conway ME (1968) How do committees invent? *Datamation* 14(4):28–31.  
Davies A, Brady T, Hobday M (2007) Organizing for solutions: Systems integration and the changing nature of large organizations. *Industrial Marketing Management* 36(7):943–954.  
de Reuver M, Sørensen C, Basole RC (2013) The digital platform: A research agenda. *J. Information Technology* 33(2):124–135.  
Dhanaraj R, Parkhe A (2006) Orchestrating innovation networks. *Academy of Management Rev.* 31(4):659–669.  
Eaton B, Elaluf-Calderwood S, Sørensen C, Yoo Y (2015) Distributed tuning of boundary resources: The architecture of Apple’s iOS platform. *MIS Quarterly* 39(1):217–243.  
Edelman BG (2015) How to navigate the sharing economy. *Harvard Business Rev.*  
Eisenmann T, Parker G, Van Alstyne MW (2006) Strategies for two-sided markets. *Harvard Business Rev.* 84(10).  
Eisenmann T, Parker G, Van Alstyne M (2011) Platform envelopment. *Strategic Management J.* 32(12):1270–1285.  
Evans DS (2013) Economics of vertical restraints for multi-sided platforms. *CPI Journal* 9(2).  
Evans DS, Schmalensee R (2007) *Catalyst Code: The Strategies Behind the World’s Most Dynamic Companies*. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.  
Evans PC, Gawer A (2016) The rise of the platform enterprise: A global survey. *The Center for Global Enterprise.  
European Commission (2018) Payment services. https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/banking-and-finance/consumer-finance-and-payments/payment-services/payment-services_en.  
Faulhaber GR (2011) Economics of net neutrality: A review. *Communications & Convergence Rev.* 3(1):7–22.  
Fisher ML, Ramdas K, Ulrich KT (1999) Component sharing in the management of product variety: A study of automotive braking systems. *Management Sci.* 45(5):297–315.  
Gandhi R (2017) The role of data centers in the digital economy. *Data Center Frontier*.  
Garud R, Kumaraswamy A, Langlois RN (2003) *Managing in the Modular Age: Architectures, Networks, and Organizations*. Blackwell Publishing, Malden, MA.  
Gawer A (2014) Bridging differing perspectives on technological platforms: Toward an integrative framework. *Research Policy* 43(7):1239–1249.  
Gawer A, Henderson R (2007) Platform owner entry and innovation in complementary markets: Evidence from Intel. *J. Economics Management Strategy* 16(1):1–34.  
Ghazawneh A, Henfridsson O (2013) Balancing platform control and external contribution in third-party development: The architecture of platforms’ boundary resources. *Information Systems J.* 41(4):1214–1234.  
Graham S, Marvin S (2001) *Splintering Urbanism: Networked Infrastructures, Technological Mobilities and the Urban Condition*. Routledge, London, UK.  
Gupta AK, Tesluk PE, Taylor MS (2007) Innovation at boundaries: The impact of modularity on innovation. *Academy of Management J.* 50(4):837–849.  
Hagiu A, Eisenmann TR (2007) A staged solution to the catch-22. *Harvard Business Rev.* 85(11):25–26.  
Hagiu A, Wright J (2013) Do you really want to be an eBay? *Harvard Business Rev.* 91(3):102–108.  
Hanseth O (2000) The economics of standards. In C.U. Ciborra et al. (Eds.), *From Control to Drift* (pp. 98–113). Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.  
Hanseth O, Aanestad M (2003) Bootstrapping networks, infrastructures and communities. *Scandinavian J. Information Systems* 15(1):3–22.  
Hanseth O, Lyytinen K (2010) architecture of infrastructure: The Internet as a case study. *J. Information Technology* 12(1):1–31.  
Jacobides MG (2006) The architecture and environment of industries: A new take on strategy. *MIT Sloan Management Rev.* 47(2):1–10.  
Jacobides MG, Knudsen T, Augier M (2006) Benefiting platform architecture: Value creation, value appropriation and the role of industry architecture. *Research Policy* 35(8):1200–1221.  
Jacobides MG, Cennamo C, Gawer A (2018) Towards a theory of ecosystems platform. *Strategic Management J.* 39(8):2255–2276.  
Karhu K, Gustafsson R, Lyytinen K (2018) Exploiting and defending open architectures: The case of Amazon’s Fire platform. *Information Systems Research* 29(2):401–422.  
Kelly K, Truong A, et al. (2017) Freedom on the net 2017: Manipulating social media to undermine democracy. *Freedom House*.  
Kirsch LJ (1997) Portfolios of control architectures: A field study of the development of control in software development projects. *Accounting Org. Soc.* 22(3–4):215–239.  
Krämer J, Wiewiorra L, Weinhardt C (2013) Net neutrality: A progress report. *Telecommunications Policy* 37(9):794–813.  
Kruchten P, Nord RL, Ozkaya I (2012) Technical debt: From platform to architecture. *IEEE Software* 29(6):83–87.  
Lee JH, Berente N (2012) Digital platforms and organizational alliances: The case of automotive OEMs. *Proc. Internat. Conf. Information Systems*, Orlando, FL.  
Lee MJ, Ba S, Li X, Stallaert J (2018) Salience bias in crowdsourcing contests. *Information Systems Research* 29(2):401–422.  
Lyytinen K, Yoo Y, Boland RJ Jr (2016) Digital architectures for innovation: A generative ecology perspective. *MIS Quarterly* 40(2):A1–A15.  
McAfee A, Brynjolfsson E, Davenport TH, Patil DJ, Barton D (2012) Big data: The management revolution. *Harvard Business Rev.* 90(10):60–68.  
McGinnis MD (1999) *Polycentric Governance and Development: Readings from the Workshop in Political Theory and Policy Analysis*. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI.  
Messerschmitt DG, Szyperski C (2003) *Software Ecosystem: Understanding an Indispensable Technology and Industry*. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.  
Monteiro E (1998) Scaling information infrastructures: The case of the Internet. *Scandinavian J. Information Systems* 10(1–2):105–130.  
Ostrom E (1990) *Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action*. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.  
Parker G, Anderson EG Jr (2002) From buyer to integrator: The transformation of the supply chain manager in the vertically disintegrated firm. *Production Oper. Management* 11(1):75–91.  
Parker G, Van Alstyne MW (2005) Two-sided network effects: A theory of information product design. *Management Sci.* 51(10):1494–1504.  
Parker G, Van Alstyne MW (2017) Innovation, openness, and platform control. *Management Sci.* 64(7):3015–3032.  
Parker G.P, Van Alstyne MW, Choudary SP (2016) *Platform Revolution: How Networked Workplaces Transform Work, Industries, and the Economy*. W.W. Norton & Company, New York.  
Pisano GP, Teece DJ (2007) How to capture value from innovation: Shaping intellectual property and industry architecture. *California Management Rev.* 50(1):278–296.  
Pon B, Seppälä T, Johansson M (2014) Openness and competition in mobile operating systems: The case of Android. *Proc. Internat. Conf. Mobile Business*.  
Qiu Y, Gopal A, Hann I-H (2017) Logic pluralism in the governance of app platform ecosystems. *MIS Quarterly* 41(3):875–A8.  
Ramasubbu N, Kemerer CF (2016) Technical debt and the reliability of enterprise software systems: A competing risks analysis. *Management Sci.* 62(5):1487–1510.  
Ransbotham S, Kiron D, Gerbert P, Reeves M (2017) Reshaping business with artificial intelligence. *MIT Sloan Management Rev.* (September 6).  
Rochet J-C, Tirole J (2003) Platform competition in two-sided markets. *J. European Economic Assoc.* 1(4):990–1029.  
Rochet J-C, Tirole J (2006) Two-sided markets: A progress report. *RAND J. Economics* 37(3):645–667.  
Rolland K, Mathiassen L, Rai A (2018) Managing digital platforms: The role of digital options and digital debt. *Information Systems Research* 29(2):423–443.  
Sandberg J, Mathiassen L, Napier N (2014) Digital options theory for IT capability investment. *J. Assoc. Information Systems* 15(7):422–453.  
Sassen S (2001) *The Global City: New York, London, Tokyo*. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.  
Schilling MA (2000) Toward a general modular systems theory and its application to interfirm product modularity. *Academy of Management Rev.* 25(2):312–334.  
Schilling MA, Steensma HK (2001) The use of modular architecture forms: An industry-level analysis. *Academy of Management J.* 44(6):1149–1168.  
Schwarz PM (1999) European data protection law and restrictions on international data flows. *Iowa Law Rev.* 80:471–496.  
Sedlmeir J, Hopf S, Neuburger R, Picot A (2017) Convergent digital infrastructures and the role of (net-) neutrality. *28th European Regional ITS Conf.*, Passau 2017, International Telecommunications Society.  
Seetharaman D, Bindley K (2018) Facebook controversy: What to know about Cambridge Analytica and your data. *Wall Street Journal* (March 23).  
Spiekermann S, Acquisti A, Böhme R, Hui KL (2015) The challenges of personal data markets and privacy. *Data Markets* 25(2):161–167.  
Statovci-Halimi B, Franzl G (2013) QoS differentiation and Internet neutrality. *Telecommunications Systems* 52(3):1605–1614.  
Svahn F, Lindgren R, Mathiassen L (2015) Applying options thinking to shape actionability in digital innovation. *Proc. 48th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences*, 4141–4150.  
Svahn F, Mathiassen L, Lindgren R (2017) Embracing digital innovation in incumbent firms: How Volvo Cars managed competing concerns. *MIS Quarterly* 41(1):239–253.  
Talton E, Tonar R (2018) Why blockchain is key to transforming how physical infrastructure works and how we think about it. *Forbes* (February 22). https://www.forbes.com/sites/ibmthink/2018/02/22/why-blockchain-is-key-to-transforming-how-physical-infrastructure-works-and-how-we-workspace/#/.  
Thomas LD, Autio E, Gann DM (2014) Architectural leverage: Putting platforms in context. *Academy of Management Perspectives* 28(2):198–219.  
Thompson JD (1967) *Organizations in Action: Social Science Bases of Administrative Theory*. McGraw-Hill, New York.  
Tilson D, Lyytinen K, Sørensen C (2010) Digital infrastructures: The missing IS research agenda. *Information Systems Research* 21(4):748–759.  
Tiwana A (2013) *Platform Ecosystems: Aligning Software, Strategy, and Organizations*. Morgan Kaufmann, Waltham, MA.  
Tiwana A, Konsynski B, Bush AA (2010) Platform evolution: Coevolutionizing platform governance with platform control. *MIS Quarterly* 34(4):675–A6.  
Ulrich K (1995) The role of product architecture in the manufacturing firm. *Research Policy* 24(3):419–440.  
Wareham J, Fox PB, Cano Giner JL (2014) Technology ecosystem governance. *Organization Studies* 35(8):1195–1216.  
Yoo Y, Henfridsson O, Lyytinen K (2010) The architecture of digital innovation. *MIS Quarterly* 34(4):725–740.  
Yoo Y, Boland RJ Jr, Lyytinen K, Majchrzak A (2012) Organizing for innovation in the digitized world. *Organization Sci.* 23(5):1398–1408.  
Zittrain J (2006) The generative internet. *Harvard Law Rev.* 119:1974–2040.