Contents lists available at [ScienceDirect](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/01663615)

# Computers in Industry

jour nal home page: [www.elsevier.com/locate/compind](http://www.elsevier.com/locate/compind)

## Cybersecurity in the context of industry 4.0: A structured classification of critical assets and business impacts

## Angelo Corallo, Mariangela Lazoi, Marianna Lezzi <sup>∗</sup>

Università del Salento, Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell'Innovazione, Campus Ecotekne, Via per Monteroni, s.n. 73100, Lecce Italy

## a r t i c l e i n f o

Article history: Received 14 June 2019 Received in revised form 7 October 2019 Accepted 9 November 2019 Available online 16 November 2019

Keywords: Industry 4.0 Networked manufacturing Cyber-attack Cybersecurity breach Business impact

## a b s t r a c t

An increasing number of cybersecurity breaches adversely affect business performance, by leveraging the vulnerabilities of networked manufacturing machines. In some cases, cyber-attacks on critical industrial equipment are able to undermine the corporate business model. Knowing and evaluating in advance the main critical assets to be protected from potential cyber-attacks and the business impacts that could occur is a source of competitive advantage.

Through the analysis of literature and an ethnographic research approach, this study proposes a structured classification of critical industrial assets within Industry 4.0 and potential adverse impacts on business performance due to breaches of cybersecurity. In particular, cybersecurity is analysed in terms of loss of confidentiality, integrity and availability of data associated with networked manufacturing machines. It is also suggested how critical assets and business impacts are correlated and how business impacts can be assessed. The proposed results can be organized in four steps for supporting companies in making decisions on cybersecurity policies. Moreover, both industry and academia can benefit from these results to conduct future analysis and investigation activities in the field of cybersecurity.

© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

## **Contents**

| 1.   |                    | Introduction 2                                                       |  |
|------|--------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|--|
| 2.   | State of the art.2 |                                                                      |  |
|      | 2.1.               | Cybersecurity in industry 4.0 2                                      |  |
|      | 2.2.               | Standards and guidance documents for cybersecurity in Industry 4.0 3 |  |
|      | 2.3.               | Methodological solutions for cybersecurity in Industry 4.0 4         |  |
| 3.   |                    | Research design 5                                                    |  |
|      | 3.1.               | Research aim.5                                                       |  |
|      | 3.2.               | Research method 5                                                    |  |
|      | 3.3.               | Ethnographic context. 5                                              |  |
| 4.   |                    | Results 6                                                            |  |
|      | 4.1.               | Critical assets analysis 6                                           |  |
|      |                    | 4.1.1.<br>Data categories identification 6                           |  |
| 4.2. |                    | Business impacts analysis 7                                          |  |
|      |                    | 4.2.1.<br>Assessment methods 7                                       |  |
| 4.3. |                    | Impact matrix definition 8                                           |  |
|      |                    | 4.3.1.<br>Loss of data confidentiality 8                             |  |
|      |                    | 4.3.2.<br>Loss of data integrity.8                                   |  |
|      |                    | 4.3.3.<br>Loss of data availability 8                                |  |
|      |                    |                                                                      |  |

∗ Corresponding author. E-mail address: [marianna.lezzi@unisalento.it](mailto:marianna.lezzi@unisalento.it) (M. Lezzi).

<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2019.103165> 0166-3615/© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

|          | 4.4.                                  | Business impact level assessment. 9 |                                                      |  |  |
|----------|---------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|--|--|
|          |                                       | 4.4.1.                              | Quantitative method.9                                |  |  |
|          |                                       | 4.4.2.                              | Qualitative method 11                                |  |  |
|          |                                       | 4.4.3.                              | Example of application in a hypothetical scenario.12 |  |  |
| 5.<br>6. | Discussion for future analysis 12     |                                     |                                                      |  |  |
|          | Conclusion 13                         |                                     |                                                      |  |  |
|          | Declaration of competing interest. 14 |                                     |                                                      |  |  |
|          | References 14                         |                                     |                                                      |  |  |
|          |                                       |                                     |                                                      |  |  |
|          |                                       |                                     |                                                      |  |  |

## **1. Introduction**

In the era of Industry 4.0, where working machines are connected into the network and each other by the use of smart devices,the scale andvariety of cyber-attackshave grownexponentially [\(MForesight](#page-13-0) [and](#page-13-0) [Computing](#page-13-0) [Community](#page-13-0) [Consortium](#page-13-0) [\(CCC\),](#page-13-0) [2017\).](#page-13-0) In such an interconnected manufacturing environment, it is known that cybersecurity breaches may negatively affect business performance ([Cisco,](#page-13-0) [2017\).](#page-13-0) As an evidence, the study undertaken by Engineering Employers' Federation (EEF) ([EEF](#page-13-0) [\(The](#page-13-0) [manufactureres'](#page-13-0) [organisation\),](#page-13-0) [2018\)](#page-13-0) on cybersecurity shows that, of the 48 % of manufacturers declaring to have been affected by cyber-attacks, around half of them have suffered financial or other business losses. In general, the cyber-crime cost varies depending on the country, the organizational dimension, the industry, the type of cyber-attack, as well as the maturity and effectiveness of the organization's security posture ([Ponemon](#page-13-0) [Institute](#page-13-0) [LLC](#page-13-0) [\(jointly](#page-13-0) [developed](#page-13-0) [by](#page-13-0) [Accenture\),](#page-13-0) [2017\).](#page-13-0) Ponemon Institute ([Ponemon](#page-13-0) [Institute](#page-13-0) [LLC](#page-13-0) [\(jointly](#page-13-0) [developed](#page-13-0) [by](#page-13-0) [Accenture\),](#page-13-0) [2017\)](#page-13-0) estimates that the average annualized cost in the manufacturing industry was about of \$10 million in 2017.

According to [Lezzi](#page-13-0) et [al.](#page-13-0) [\(2018\),](#page-13-0) cyber-attacks to manufacturing systems may entail a certain number of negative business impacts. In particular, these impacts involve (i) sabotage of the entire critical infrastructure or target machines and components, (ii) denial of service of networks and computers, (iii) theft of industrial trade secrets and intellectual property, (iv) violation of regulations in the fields of safety and pollution, (v) until the occurrence of life-threatening situations for workers. In dealing with such difficult situations, companies incur significant economic damages for restoring normal working conditions (which translates into a drop in productivity), as well as facing the loss of competitive power in the relevant market.

Being able to face in a proactive way cybersecurity issues is a key driver for preserving companies' competitive advantage (in terms of economic growth and market position strengthening) ([Barbier](#page-13-0) et [al.,](#page-13-0) [2016\).](#page-13-0) Moreover, cybersecurity strategies should be fully integrated with organizational and information technology strategies in order to increase performance of the entire manufacturing value chain [\(Waslo](#page-13-0) et [al.,](#page-13-0) [2017\).](#page-13-0) However, according to a 2018 survey study ([Deloitte,](#page-13-0) [2018\)](#page-13-0) carried out by Deloitte, 64 % of leaders of organisations have declared that cybersecurity and technology related risks are currently managed in an "inadequate" or "to be improved" way.

In line with existing security standards and guidance documents ([European](#page-13-0) [Network](#page-13-0) [and](#page-13-0) [Information](#page-13-0) [Security](#page-13-0) [Agency](#page-13-0) [\(ENISA\),](#page-13-0) [2011;](#page-13-0) [E.C.S.](#page-13-0) [Organisation,](#page-13-0) [2017\),](#page-13-0) some attempts to manage cybersecurity issues have already been done ([Lezzi](#page-13-0) et [al.,](#page-13-0) [2018\).](#page-13-0) Some of them aim at providing high-level guidance (mainly in the management area) useful to address the argument; some others, instead, propose more structured solutions (targeted to IT staff), which however need to be customized to the specific industrial scenario. Moreover, although there are a certain number of methodological solutions that companies can currently adopt to deal with cybersecurity in 4.0 industrial contexts, little importance is given to the analysis of critical assets to be protected and the related assessment of business impacts.

Following the asset/impact-oriented approach of NIST ([Ross,](#page-13-0) [2012\),](#page-13-0) this paper proposes a structured classification of critical assets to be protected against cyber-attacks in the context of Industry 4.0 and the potential impacts on business performance. Moreover, the relationship between assets and impacts, as well as the methods for assessing business impacts, are also analysed. It is expected that these activities help companies understand which industrial assets to investtheir own economic efforts, in what order of priority and to what extent.

The proposed results are rooted in the literature studies and are strengthen by an ethnographic study on a representative 4.0-manufacturing context represented by a series of networked Computer Numerical Control (CNC) machines in an aerospace factory where cybersecurity issues are an emerging and relevant challenge to be faced ([Marketsand](#page-13-0) [Markets,](#page-13-0) [2015\).](#page-13-0)

The next section of the paper provides an overview of the main cybersecurity standards, guidance documents and methodological solutions that can be used to manage cybersecurity in the Industry 4.0. Section [3](#page-4-0) describes the research aim, as well as the research method and context analysed. The results of the study are detailed in Section [4,](#page-5-0) where the critical asset analysis, the business impacts analysis, the impact matrix definition, and the business impact level assessment are respectively proposed referring to 4.0 manufacturing contexts. In a further discussion section, to lead future studies and applications, the steps and methods for collecting information in other industrial contexts are treated. A final section concerning conclusion ends the paper.

## **2. State of the art**

This section highlights the current role of cybersecurity in the context of Industry 4.0. In particular, the focus will be on the main standards, guidance documents and methodological solutions available to address cybersecurity issues in these industrial contexts.

## 2.1. Cybersecurity in industry 4.0

Cybersecurity is one of the main challenges for companies that approach the Industry 4.0 paradigm.

Industry 4.0 means making use of intelligent, interconnected Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) with the aim to automate all phases of industrial operations (from design and manufacturing to supply chain and service maintenance) ([European](#page-13-0) [Union](#page-13-0) [Agency](#page-13-0) [for](#page-13-0) [Networked](#page-13-0) [and](#page-13-0) [Information](#page-13-0) [Security](#page-13-0) [\(ENISA\),](#page-13-0) [2018\).](#page-13-0) In other words, Industry 4.0 connects production to information and communication technologies, merges product and process data with machine data and enables machines to communicate with each other.

Industry 4.0 transformations have the potential to create value for companies with efficiency improvements of 15–20 percent ([Behrendt](#page-13-0) et [al.,](#page-13-0) [2017\).](#page-13-0) In particular, Industry 4.0 performance improvements are achieved by (i) maximizing asset utilization and minimizing machine downtime through remote monitoring and predictive maintenance, (ii) increasing labour productivity thanks to manual labour automation, (iii) reducing inventory levels and improving the quality of services and products by leveraging analysis of data produced in real-time by machine sensors.

However, the presence of connected Cyber-Physical Systems in industrial environments poses a considerable security challenge since most systems of this type were not designed with cybersecurity in mind [\(Tuptuk](#page-13-0) [and](#page-13-0) [Hailes,](#page-13-0) [2018\).](#page-13-0)

In the past, the manufacturing systems were closed and security was ensured by their isolation and physical access control. Today, on the contrary, modern manufacturing machines are equipped with a number of smart devices (e.g., sensors and actuators) and are connected via wireless networks or wired Ethernet to other machines and data processing systems. Manufacturing components communicate over private industrial networks using specific protocols, but these do not provide adequate protection against cyber-threats ([European](#page-13-0) [Union](#page-13-0) [Agency](#page-13-0) [for](#page-13-0) [Networked](#page-13-0) [and](#page-13-0) [Information](#page-13-0) [Security](#page-13-0) [\(ENISA\),](#page-13-0) [2018\).](#page-13-0) Such insecure network connectionsmakemanufacturing systems vulnerable to an increasingly number of cyber-attacks [\(Wu](#page-13-0) et [al.,](#page-13-0) [2018\),](#page-13-0) so that the data associated with these systems can be accessed by unauthorized users.

According to the study conducted by the European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) [\(European](#page-13-0) [Union](#page-13-0) [Agency](#page-13-0) [for](#page-13-0) [Networked](#page-13-0) [and](#page-13-0) [Information](#page-13-0) [Security](#page-13-0) [\(ENISA\),](#page-13-0) [2018\),](#page-13-0) the most critical assets in terms of cybersecurity in Industry 4.0 are Industrial Control Systems (ICS), followed by Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) gateways, and sensors and actuators.

In particular, Industrial Control Systems ensure the automatic operation of technical industrial facilities, controlling and monitoring business processes. These systems include Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems and Distributed Control Systems (DCS), the core components of which are the Programmable Logic Controller (PLC), Remote Terminal Unit (RTU), Intelligent Electronic Device (IED) and the interface technologies ([Sullivan](#page-13-0) et [al.,](#page-13-0) [2016\).](#page-13-0) IIoT gateways manage multiple communication technologies (wired and wireless) using different protocols, as well as performing advanced data analysis (e.g., machine learning algorithms and big data analysis) and real-time controls on the system by leveraging connected sensors and actuators. At last, sensors and actuators are IIoT devices that respectively measure system parameters (e.g., temperature, vibrations, motion, and so on) and execute specific actions on it.

## 2.2. Standards and guidance documents for cybersecurity in Industry 4.0

In the context of Industry 4.0, cybersecurity standards and guidance documents help companies create a common understanding of industry security controls and methods for assessing the effectiveness of such controls. Over the last decade, bodies such as the European Cyber Security Organization (ESCO) and the European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) have gathered existing standards and guidelines, as well as best practices and procedures to address cybersecurity issues in relation to industrial systems [\(European](#page-13-0) [Network](#page-13-0) [and](#page-13-0) [Information](#page-13-0) [Security](#page-13-0) [Agency](#page-13-0) [\(ENISA\),](#page-13-0) [2011;](#page-13-0) [E.C.S.](#page-13-0) [Organisation,](#page-13-0) [2017\).](#page-13-0) Some of the most relevant standards and specifications are described below. These can be adopted in the Industry 4.0 era to assess the general cybersecurity attitude of a system or organization. The main features are shown in the following [Table](#page-3-0) 1.

The ISA/IEC 62443 series of standards addresses the issue of security for Industrial Automation and Control Systems (IACS) [\(ISA,](#page-13-0) [2016\).](#page-13-0) In particular, the objective of the application of these standards is to improve the safety, availability, integrity and confidentiality of components of Industrial Automation and Control Systems and to provide criteria for the procurement and implementation of secure industrial automation and control systems. In this way, compliance with the requirements of the 62443 series can lead companies to improve electronic security and identify and address vulnerabilities, reducing the risk of compromising confidential information or causing degradation or failure of the equipment or processes under control.

On the other hand, the IACS Cybersecurity Certification Framework (ICCF) [\(Theron](#page-13-0) [and](#page-13-0) [Lazari,](#page-13-0) [2018\)](#page-13-0) proposes four IACS cybersecurity certification schemes (i.e., self-declaration of compliance, independent compliance assessment, product cyber resilience certification and full cyber resilience certification), which involve three different evaluation activities such as compliance assessment, cyber resilience testing and development process evaluation. The objective of the ICCF is to encourage the provision of certified components in order to improve the in-depth cyberdefence of the IACS.

Moreover, the French Network and Information Security Agency, the ANSII, published some guides ([ANSSI,](#page-13-0) [2012;](#page-13-0) [ANSSI,](#page-13-0) [2014a;](#page-13-0) [ANSSI,](#page-13-0) [2014b\)](#page-13-0) about cybersecurity for Industrial Control Systems. These guides play a key role in helping all industry stakeholders to consider cybersecurity issues. The ANSII assumption is that cybersecurity in industry means analysing system vulnerabilities (hardware, software, procedures and human factors) in order to implement measures to safeguard the continuity of core business functions.

Although API Standard 1164 [\(American](#page-13-0) [Petroleum](#page-13-0) [Institute](#page-13-0) [\(API\),](#page-13-0) [2016\)](#page-13-0) offers guidance to operators of oil and liquid gas pipeline systems to improve SCADA cybersecurity, the use of this standard is not limited to pipelines. As an evidence, the standard analyses the vulnerabilities of the SCADA systems that can be exploited by unauthorized entities and defines the processes to be implemented in the company to achieve this goal; it also provides a list of practices to harden the system architecture and examples of industry best practices.

The Industrial Control System (ICS) Security Compendium [\(Bundesamt](#page-13-0) [für](#page-13-0) [Sicherheit](#page-13-0) [in](#page-13-0) [der](#page-13-0) [Informationstechnik](#page-13-0) [\(BSI\),](#page-13-0) [2013\),](#page-13-0) proposed by the German Federal Office for Information Security (Bundesamt fv¨ r Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik - BSI), provides a set of architectural,technical and organisational best practices for owners of ICS assets on: security-specific processes and policies; selection of systems and components, as well as service providers and integrators; constructional and physical securing; and technical measures. Moreover, the ICS Security Compendium describes a methodology for auditing the ICS, although it does not define any evaluation scheme.

At the same way, the Catalog of Control Systems Security ([U.S.](#page-13-0) [Department](#page-13-0) [of](#page-13-0) [Homeland](#page-13-0) [Security,](#page-13-0) [2011\)](#page-13-0) collects a large sampling of recommendations and guidelines to increase the security of control systems from physical and cyber-attacks. The catalogue does not refer to a specific industry, but provides a master list of reference information to be used for the revision and development of standards for any control system.

Furthermore, the Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team (ICS-CERT) conducts security assessments with reference to critical infrastructure and provides options in view of mitigating and managing cybersecurity risks. In particular, the ICS-CERT Assessments ([Industrial](#page-13-0) [Control](#page-13-0) [Systems](#page-13-0) [Cyber](#page-13-0) [Emergency](#page-13-0) [Response](#page-13-0) [Team](#page-13-0) [\(2016\)\)](#page-13-0) are focused on design and network architecture areas. Such assessments provide stakeholders with the understanding and context necessary to build effective defencein-depth processes for enhancing cybersecurity.

<span id="page-3-0"></span>Cybersecurity standards and guideline documents in Industry 4.0.

| Standard/Guidance<br>document                            | Industrial asset involved                                           | Keywords                                                                                         | Year of publication   | Reference                                                              |
|----------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ISA/IEC 62443                                            | Industrial Automation and<br>Control Systems (IACS)                 | Standard; IACS safety,<br>availability, integrity and<br>confidentiality; Electronic<br>security | 2016                  | ISA (2016)                                                             |
| IACS Cybersecurity<br>Certification Framework<br>(ICCF)  | Industrial Automation and<br>Control Systems (IACS)                 | Framework; Cybersecurity<br>certification schemes; IACS'<br>in-depth cyber defence               | 2018                  | Theron and Lazari (2018)                                               |
| ANSSI Cybersecurity for<br>Industrial Control<br>Systems | Industrial Control Systems<br>(ICS)                                 | Guide; ICS cybersecurity;<br>System vulnerabilities;<br>Business function<br>continuity          | 2012 and 2014         | ANSSI (2012); ANSSI<br>(2014a); ANSSI (2014b)                          |
| API Standard 1164                                        | Supervisory Control and<br>Data Acquisition (SCADA)                 | Standard; Oil and liquid<br>gas pipeline; SCADA<br>cybersecurity; Best<br>practices              | 2009 (Second Edition) | American Petroleum<br>Institute (API) (2016)                           |
| ICS Security Compendium                                  | Industrial Control Systems<br>(ICS)                                 | Compendium; ICS security;<br>Best practices; Audit<br>methodology                                | 2013                  | Bundesamt für Sicherheit<br>in der Informationstechnik<br>(BSI) (2013) |
| Catalog of Control Systems<br>Security                   | Control Systems of critical<br>infrastructures and key<br>resources | Catalogue; Guidelines;<br>Control Systems<br>cybersecurity                                       | 2011                  | U.S. Department of<br>Homeland Security (2011)                         |
| ICS-CERT Assessments                                     | Industrial Control Systems<br>(ICS)                                 | Assessment; ICS<br>cybersecurity risks; Critical<br>infrastructure                               | 2016                  | Industrial Control Systems<br>Cyber Emergency Response<br>Team (2016)  |
| NIST 800-82                                              | Industrial Control Systems<br>(ICS)                                 | Guide; ICS security<br>program; NIST SP 800-53<br>security controls                              | 2015                  | Stouffer et al. (2015)                                                 |

Finally,the NIST 800-82 [\(Stouffer](#page-13-0) et [al.,](#page-13-0) [2015\)](#page-13-0) gives a guide to the security of Industrial Control Systems by developing and deploying an ICS security program, integrating security into network architectures, and implementing the security controls of the NIST SP 800-53 [\(NIST,](#page-13-0) [2013\).](#page-13-0) These security controls, targeted at organizations and information systems supporting the executive agencies, include information security program management controls and privacy controls.

#### 2.3. Methodological solutions for cybersecurity in Industry 4.0

The study of the literature has revealed the presence of a certain number of methodological solutions that companies can adopt as a guide in dealing with cybersecurity issues in 4.0 industrial environments. In the following [Table](#page-4-0) 2, an overview of the frameworks, methodologies and approaches are collected and listed.

In particular, the NIST framework [\(NIST,](#page-13-0) [2018\)](#page-13-0) for improving critical infrastructure cybersecurity is aimed at managing the cybersecurity risks associated with Information Technology (IT), Industrial Control Systems (ICS), Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) and, more generally, connected devices. The Framework includes five core functions (i.e., identification, protection, detection, response, and recovery)to be implemented through a set of security controls; its objective is to support organizations byproviding a commonlanguage for understanding, managing and expressing cybersecurity risk to internal and external stakeholders.

Moreover, [\(Babiceanu](#page-13-0) [and](#page-13-0) [Seker](#page-13-0) [\(2017\)\)](#page-13-0) propose a framework for addressing systems cybersecurity and resilience for Software-Defined Networks-based (SDN-based) manufacturing applications. This framework pays attention to the identification of the system, the definition of resilience objectives, the analysis of vulnerabilities and the involvement of stakeholders, as important aspects to be considered in order to maintain the manufacturing system in a required state of security.

The DevOps approach (based on software development for information technology operations) enables, instead, new scenarios for monitoring industrial security [\(Jansen](#page-13-0) [and](#page-13-0) [Jeschke,](#page-13-0) [2018\).](#page-13-0) In particular, this approach consists of five steps (each of them requires a high degree of automation): (1) Planning development activities, based on user stories that rely on requirements from customers and operations; (2) Developing and testing new service features; (3) Releasing and deploying new software versions/features; (4) Operating the service and related software within the operational environment; (5) Monitoring effectiveness and efficiency. In general, the DevOps approach has proved to be an appropriate framework for improving the quality of software throughout its lifecycle.

On the other hand, with the aim to visually express security risks of Industrial Control Systems, [\(Kobara](#page-13-0) [\(2016\)\)](#page-13-0) presents a new attack tree approach, in which the problem is shown as root and its sources as leaves. The proposed attack tree also allows to represent the severity level of each stage (node), the transferability from one stage to another, and the countermeasures with their effects.

There are different methods of risk assessment and identification of potential threats to smart manufacturing systems [\(Wu](#page-13-0) et [al.,](#page-13-0) [2018;](#page-13-0) [Ren](#page-14-0) et [al.,](#page-14-0) [2017\).](#page-14-0) For example, a typical risk assessment method is the hierarchical model proposed by [Zhu](#page-13-0) [and](#page-13-0) [Basar](#page-13-0) [\(2011\),](#page-13-0) which defines the boundaries of the system to assess the risks and identifies the potential vulnerabilities on six layers: physical, control, communication, network, supervisory and management.

[Radanliev](#page-13-0) et [al.](#page-13-0) [\(2018a\);](#page-13-0) [Radanliev](#page-14-0) et [al.](#page-14-0) [\(2018b\)](#page-14-0) propose an impact assessment model for articulating possible impacts and calculating the economic impact of Internet of Things (IoT) cyber risk. In the proposed model, Monte Carlo simulation plays a key role in reducing the IoT cyber risk uncertainty and in enabling the approximation and estimation of the economic impact.

Lastly, ([Januario](#page-14-0) et [al.](#page-14-0) [\(2016\)\)](#page-14-0) propose a methodology for assessing vulnerabilities in the context of SCADA systems. The methodology entails: (i) for each component, a complete network representation; (ii) for each subsystem, the definition of the functions and decomposition ofthe components in each subsystem that implements them; (iii) for each operation,the list of resources used and the operations that can affect them.

<span id="page-4-0"></span>Cybersecurity methodological solutions in Industry 4.0.

| Methodological Solution                                                     | Industrial asset involved                                                                                                               | Keywords                                                                                        | Year of<br>publication | Reference                                            |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| NIST Framework for<br>Improving Critical<br>Infrastructure<br>Cybersecurity | Information Technology (IT),<br>Industrial Control Systems<br>(ICS), Cyber-Physical Systems<br>(CPS) and any other connected<br>devices | Framework; Critical<br>infrastructure cybersecurity;<br>Five core functions based               | 2018                   | NIST (2018)                                          |
| Cybersecurity and<br>resilience framework                                   | Software-defined<br>networking-based<br>manufacturing applications                                                                      | Framework; Manufacturing<br>systems security; SDN-based                                         | 2017                   | Babiceanu and Seker<br>(2017)                        |
| DevOps approach                                                             | Cyber-Physical System (CPS),<br>industrial automation<br>and control systems IACS                                                       | Approach; Industrial security<br>monitoring; five step based                                    | 2018                   | Jansen and Jeschke (2018)                            |
| Attack tree approach                                                        | Industrial Control System (ICS)                                                                                                         | Approach; ICS security risks;<br>Attack tree                                                    | 2016                   | Kobara (2016)                                        |
| Hierarchical model for risk<br>assessment                                   | Industrial Control System (ICS)                                                                                                         | Model; Risk assessment<br>method; Smart manufacturing<br>systems; Six layers<br>vulnerabilities | 2011                   | Zhu and Basar (2011)                                 |
| Impact assessment model                                                     | Internet of Things (IoT) devices                                                                                                        | Model; IoT cyber risk;<br>economic risk assessment                                              | 2018                   | Radanliev et al. (2018a),<br>Radanliev et al.(2018b) |
| Vulnerability assessment<br>methodology                                     | Supervisory Control and Data<br>Acquisition (SCADA) system                                                                              | Methodology; SCADA systems<br>vulnerabilities                                                   | 2016                   | Januario et al. (2016)                               |

#### **3. Research design**

#### 3.1. Research aim

A significant number of methodological solutions have already been developed in order to address cybersecurity issues in the Industry 4.0. However, not much emphasis is placed on the analysis of critical assets to protect against cyber-attacks and the resulting business impacts. On the other hand, this kind of analyses in the context of networked manufacturing could play a strategic role for companies to understand which industrial assets to invest their efforts in terms of security, in what order of priority and to what extent. With the aim to support company management in dealing with such cybersecurity issues, in this study the focus is on the assessment of the adverse business impacts resulting from cybersecurity breaches to networked manufacturing machines. In particular, the following research questions are addressed:

- RQ1. What are the critical assets that if affected by cyber threats prevent the company from doing business?
- RQ2. What are the adverse business impacts due to cybersecurity breaches?
- RQ3. What is the relationship between essential assets and business impacts?
- RQ4. How to evaluate the business impact level?

## 3.2. Research method

The analysis of the state of the art has highlighted the lack of an impact assessment methodology focused on the deep understanding and measurement of the impacts' value in the context of Industry 4.0. The literature analysis suggested some areas of action and a gap to be filled in order to support companies in the implementation of proper measures on cybersecurity.

In order to satisfy the research aim and answer research questions,the NIST 800-30 asset/impact-oriented approach([Ross,](#page-13-0) [2012\)](#page-13-0) has been considered as reference for addressing cybersecurity risks in 4.0 industrial contexts. The NIST's approach has as starting point for risks assessment the identification of assets affected by threat events and the impacts that could occur, possibly using the results of a mission or business impact analysis and identifying threat events that cause those impacts.

Furthermore, with the aim to make this study strictly related to industrial practice, ethnography has been used as research method. Using field-notes, ethnography allows to collect evidence and obtain results concerning the analysed context [\(Creswell](#page-14-0) [and](#page-14-0) [Creswell,](#page-14-0) [2018\).](#page-14-0) Several studies [\(Butlewski](#page-14-0) et [al.,](#page-14-0) [2016;](#page-14-0) [Blomberg](#page-14-0) et [al.,](#page-14-0) [2003;](#page-14-0) [Mohedas](#page-14-0) et [al.,](#page-14-0) [2015;](#page-14-0) [Kosaka,](#page-14-0) [2012\)](#page-14-0) use ethnography for supporting the activities of ideas definition, feedback collection and different alternatives evaluation for the design of products, services and methods. Through the application of ethnography, the context awareness increases and the research results achieved have a higher level of suitability for the context explored [\(Jones,](#page-14-0) [2006\).](#page-14-0)

Therefore, the field-notes ([Bryma](#page-14-0) [and](#page-14-0) [Bell,](#page-14-0) [2015\)](#page-14-0) were collected by observing the operations of a manufacturing cell composed of CNC machines. In particular, field-notes were taken on the workcycles performed within the manufacturing cell and on the input and output data associated with the networked machine tools. The focus was on data flow generated by the machines, the security issues to be managed and the technologies used. The field-notes were then re-read, coded and analysed in accordance with the purposes of this study.

In conclusion, on the basis of the evidence collected in the literature, the NIST guidelines and the ethnography research method, a structured classification of critical assets to be protected from cyber-attacks and their business impacts has been defined. Moreover, the relationship between critical assets and business impact was identified, as well as the methods of assessing business impacts. The search schema, with the procedures and results, is shown in [Fig.](#page-5-0) 1.

## 3.3. Ethnographic context

The ethnographic observations tookplaceduring the secondhalf of year 2018, in conjunction with the activities of TOREADOR European project1 and related industrial scenarios. The ethnography context was that of manufacturing cells (see [Fig.](#page-5-0) 2) of aeronautical components, where there are a certain number of networked Computer Numerical Control (CNC) machines equipped with sensors and actuators. In particular, CNC machine tools are connected in the network through sensors that record in real time a large amount

<sup>1</sup> For more information on TOREADOR project see [http://www.toreador-project.](http://www.toreador-project.eu/) [eu/](http://www.toreador-project.eu/).

<span id="page-5-0"></span>**Fig. 2.** A simplified version of the manufacturing cell data flow.

of data on the machines health status and the workpieces' properties. Machine information is sent through the OPC-UA protocol towards some server in order to be processed and analysed; while, workpieces data are provided by using the MTConnect standard to a real-time software, in charge of collecting and displaying measurement results and handing gauges without operator intervention. Finally, the corrective commands, which are sent from the control units to the machine tools, are implemented in the manufacturing work cycles via the actuators.

The ethnographic context observed is representative of 4.0 industrial environments. Actually, the manufacturing industry of aeronautical components, like other manufacturing industries where the production is supported by advanced technologies (such as, cloud computing, big data analytics and machine learning) and networked smart devices, is addressing the emerging challenges of cybersecurity. In this case, attackers can take control of the manufacturing process to interface with the production or even alter the quality of the products. In addition, confidential data associated with the manufacturing process can be stolen, causing significant economic damage to the company. Therefore, the flow of input and output data associated with aeronautical manufacturing machines represents a strategical knowledge for the company that needs to be protected from any breach of cybersecurity.

## **4. Results**

In the next subsections, the critical assets and business impacts are classified, referring to the networked manufacturing machines within Industry 4.0. Subsequently, with the aim of linking a specific critical asset violated by a cyber-attack with its business impact, a matrix of impacts is defined. Finally, the methods of evaluating the business impacts are examined and some indicators are proposed.

## 4.1. Critical assets analysis

In order to assess the impacts of cyber threats on business performance, one of the main points to focus on is the characterization of the essential assets to be protected ([Pfleeger](#page-14-0) et [al.,](#page-14-0) [2015\).](#page-14-0)

With reference to the results of the literature review ([Lezzi](#page-13-0) et [al.](#page-13-0) [\(2018\)\),](#page-13-0) based on the characterization of cybersecurity issues in Industry 4.0 contexts, Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) and Industrial Control Systems (ICS) are considered the main industrial assets involved in cybersecurity issues. These systems could be affected by a number of vulnerabilities, potentially placed in every interfaces between different components where there is information exchange ([He](#page-14-0) et [al.,](#page-14-0) [2016\).](#page-14-0) For instance, vulnerabilities of SCADA systems (that are a subset of ICS) may concern the communication infrastructure and network protocols, application server and database server, human machine interfaces, program logic controllers and remote terminal units [\(Corbò](#page-14-0) et [al.,](#page-14-0) [2017;](#page-14-0) [Januario](#page-14-0) et [al.,](#page-14-0) [2016\).](#page-14-0) At the same way, since modern Internet-connected manufacturing machines (such as those in the bevel gears manufacturing cell) are smart computing systems taking part of the so-called Operational Technologies (OT), they may have the following vulnerabilities ([Wu](#page-13-0) et [al.,](#page-13-0) [2018\):](#page-13-0)

- Operating systems or firmware, which enable machine operations;
- Application software (e.g. CAD, CAM and CAE software, machine control software, other general-purpose software), which allow the machine to execute its work-cycles according to design, manufacturing and engineering specifications.
- Industrial communication protocols (such as, MTconnect, Modbus, Profibus, EtherNet/IP and OPC-UA), which enable digital data communication between machine devices (sensors and actuators) and other entities/devices through a network;
- Smart devices (such as sensors and actuators) embedded into machines, which manage input and output data flow via wired or wireless network.

Exploiting these vulnerabilities through cyber-attacks means acting on data. In particular, data may be improperly intercepted (data confidentiality breach), modified or falsified (data integrity breach), or their flow may be interrupted (data availability breach).

## 4.1.1. Data categories identification

Data are the critical assets to be protected from cyber-attacks in the context of Industry 4.0.

A number of data is associated with modern CNC machines, equipped with smart devices that monitor in real time the machine performance inreference to the entireproductionprocess ([Tao](#page-14-0) et [al.](#page-14-0) [\(2018\);](#page-14-0) [Turner](#page-14-0) et [al.](#page-14-0) [\(2015\)\).](#page-14-0) [Fig.](#page-6-0) 3 shows the networked machines' input and output data flow; this allows the following data categories (DCs) to be recognized:

- DC1: Product design information (e.g., dimension, weight and material);
- DC2: Machine setting parameters (e.g., spindle speed, depth of cut, feed rate, etc.);
- DC3: Machine operations sequence (e.g.the set of instructions for tool position);
- DC4: Machine working parameters (e.g. spindle speed and motor power, tools position, vibrations and temperature, and so on);
- DC5: Machine components' status (e.g. actual tool wear);
- DC6: Workpiece properties (e.g. dimensional and geometric accuracy, as well as surface roughness, texture and finish);
- DC7: Corrective instructions on machine setting parameters.

In particular, product geometrical information, machine setting parameters and operation sequence are machine input data; they go from a data processing system to the machine controller. On the

<span id="page-6-0"></span>**Fig. 3.** Input and output data flow.

other hand, the machine working parameters and the status of its components, as well as the workpiece properties are machine output data, which go from smart sensors (embedded on machine) to a control system (such as a SCADA system). Finally, the corrective instruction on the machine setting parameters represent the feedback sent by the control system to the actuators installed on the machine.

In general, the input and output data flow associated with networked manufacturing machines is a strategical knowledge to be preserved from any cybersecurity breaches.

#### 4.2. Business impacts analysis

The adverse impact of a cybersecurity event can be described in terms of loss or degradation of one or more of the following data security requirements: confidentiality, integrity and availability ([Stoneburmer](#page-14-0) et [al.,](#page-14-0) [2002\).](#page-14-0)

In particular, confidentiality requirement refers to the protection of information from unauthorized disclosure. In the context of Industry 4.0, the business impact due to unauthorized disclosure of confidential manufacturing information entails the loss of trade secrets and intellectual property. This could undermine the company's competitive advantage as the sole data owner, damage the company's image and reputation, as well as entail financial penalties for having breached commercial agreements in the field of data confidentiality. In this context, the loss of competitive advantage in favour of competitors means to lose strategical knowledge on processes or products [\(Ahmad](#page-14-0) et [al.,](#page-14-0) [2014\);](#page-14-0) while, image and reputation damages negatively impact on behaviour of stakeholder (customers, suppliers/contractors, investors and potential employees) [\(Gatzert,](#page-14-0) [2015\).](#page-14-0)

The integrity requirement, instead, refers to protectinformation from improper modification so thatthe trustworthiness of data and IT systems can be guaranteed. In Industry 4.0, when manufacturing information is improperly manipulated, the business impact results in the sabotage of the entire critical infrastructure or specific machines and components. In this way,there could be a quality degradation of products realized, damage to working machines and, more generally, a violation of standards and regulations in the field of safety and pollution, as well as of commercial agreements with customers on product specifications. In the worst case, lifethreatening situations for workers may occur [\(Tuptuk](#page-13-0) [and](#page-13-0) [Hailes,](#page-13-0) [2018\).](#page-13-0)

Finally, the availability requirement guarantees that data are accessible and usable on demand. Ifthis security requirementis not satisfied in Industry 4.0 environments, there is a denial of service of networks, system devices or any other computational resource correlated to the manufacturing environment. This negatively affects the business in terms of loss of system functionality and operational effectiveness, that is to say loss of production time [\(Hovav](#page-14-0) [and](#page-14-0) [D'Arcy,](#page-14-0) [2019\).](#page-14-0) All that may cause the breach of commercial agreements with customers on delivery time, but also a quality degradation of the workpieces for some types of manufacturing processes.

#### 4.2.1. Assessment methods

Business impacts can be classified as tangible or intangible if respectively they can be measured quantitatively (e.g., loss of revenue) or cannot be measured in specific units of measurement but qualified (e.g., in terms of high, medium and low impacts) [\(Stoneburmer](#page-14-0) et [al.,](#page-14-0) [2002\).](#page-14-0)

In particular, tangible impacts are measured by evaluating the costs to repair the system and correct problems when a cyberattack succeeds. For this reason, the theft of industrial trade secrets and intellectual property means to sustain financial penalties due to the violation of data confidentiality agreements with industrial partners. On the other hand, the sabotage of the entire critical infrastructure or specific machines and components entails a significant expenditure for repairing the physical systems, greater production waste due to degradation of product quality and loss of sales due to machine downtime. Furthermore, the company can face in financial penalties caused by the violation of regulations and standards in the field of safety and pollution, and of commercial agreements with customers on product specifications. In addition, substantial financial penalties may be imposed on the company when life-threatening situations for workers occur. Finally, denial of service of networks, system devices or any other computational resource involves a series of costs for restoring the system functionalities, higher inventory levels for raw materials (or supplies) and semi-finished goods, loss of sales due to machine downtime, financial penalties for breaching of commercial agreements with customers on delivery time and greater production waste due to the quality degradation of the workpieces.

Inthe case ofnon-tangible impacts, suchas reductionof competitive advantage and damage to the company image and reputation due to the theft of intellectual property after a cyber-attack, a qualitative assessment can be made. This assessment concerns the definition of the impacts magnitude according to the high, medium and low three-dimensional scale. In particular, the loss of competitive advantage in favour of competitors means to evaluate the impact magnitude for the loss of strategical knowledge on manufacturing processes or products; while, image and reputation damages can be evaluated in terms of negative impact on behaviour of stakeholder (customers, suppliers/contractors, investors or potential employees).

Based on the literature, the NIST guide and the ethnographic observations, [Table](#page-8-0) 3 provides an overview on the relationship between the loss or degradation of data and systems security requirements, the resulting business impacts and the methods to assess them, in reference to Industry 4.0 contexts.

#### 4.3. Impact matrix definition

With the aim to relate the data categories (DC), identified in 4.1.1, with the loss of data security requirements, according to the different types of business impacts (BI) described in section [4.2,](#page-6-0) an impacts matrix is proposed (see [Table](#page-9-0) 4). The matrix was populated as a result of ethnographic observations conducted in the industrial scenario of reference. In particular, the assignment of specific business impacts to each data category is addressed to estimate the business impacts level (in terms of Impact Magnitude - IM or Impact Cost - IC).

#### 4.3.1. Loss of data confidentiality

The loss of confidentiality of product design information (DC1) could affect the reduction of competitive advantage in favour of competitors due to the loss of distinctive knowledge about the products and their making process (IM.1). At the same time, a damage to company image and reputation (IM.2) could occur, so that customers lose confidence in manufacturers and decide to change supplier. In fact, itis reasonable to think that customers do not want information abouttheir products to be detected in an unauthorized manner. Finally, the company may also incur financial penalties (IC.4) due to the violation of data confidentiality agreements with customers.

In the event of a loss of confidentiality of data relating to the machine setting parameters (DC2) or the machine operations sequence (DC3), it is expected that no significant business impact will be observed. In fact, in the manufacturing industry, these data categories, iftaken individually, do not represent strategical knowledge (which could affect the company competitive advantage), and their unauthorized disclosure does not have significant negative impacts on the behaviour of stakeholders or financial penalties in favour of industrial partners.

On the other hand, losing confidentiality of data related to the machine working parameters (DC4) or the status of its components (DC5) could undermine the company image and reputation (IM.2) since these data provide information on the health status of the entire manufacturing system. Thus, if the machine malfunctions were revealed, the company reliability would be compromised, resulting in loss of customers and investors.

The loss of confidentiality of data on the properties of workpieces (DC6), as indicators of the product quality, could have a negative impact on the company competitive advantage in favour of its competitors (IM.1). In fact, in case of product defects, competitors could take advantage of the situation, by adopting ad hoc market strategies to gain a greater market share.

Finally,no significant business impactis expectedto be observed if there is a loss of confidentiality of data concerning corrective instructions on machine setting parameters (DC7). As in the case of data relating to machine setting parameters and operations sequence, also these data, if taken individually, do not represent strategical knowledge such as to influence the company competitive advantage, neither their disclosure can cause significant negative impacts on stakeholder behaviour or financial penalties for the company.

#### 4.3.2. Loss of data integrity

Concerning data integrity, unauthorized modification of product design information (DC1) could lead to degradation of product quality, as well as violation of commercial agreements with customers about product specifications. Consequently, in the first case, there will be increased production waste (IC.2) and sales losses (IC.3) will occur; while, in the second case, the manufacturer will incur financial penalties (IC.4).

The loss of integrity of data on the machine setting parameters (DC2) could cause a quality degradation of the products and a violation both of the standards and regulations in the field of safety and pollution (until the occurrence of life-threating situations for workers) and of the commercial agreements with customers on product specifications. Thus, greater production waste (IC.2) and sales losses (IC.3) will characterize the first scenario; while, additional financial penalties (IC.4) will be applied for violation of safety and pollution standards and regulations, or commercial agreements.

Moreover, the loss of data integrity on the operations sequence (DC3) that the machine has to run in the work-cycle could damage the working machine itself, or cause the violation of standards and regulations in the field of safety and pollution, until create lifethreatening situations for workers. Therefore, it will be necessary to repair the physical systems (IC.1) andmakefinancial efforts (IC.4) to compensate for the violation of standards and regulations and personal injury.

On the other hand, unauthorized modifications of data relating to the machine working parameters (DC4) and the status ofits components (IC.5), as well as the workpieces' properties (IC.6) do not have significant business impacts. In fact, these are machine output data that provide an overview of the health status of the entire manufacturing system and the quality of the products realized, so that their alteration could only increase controls on machines and products before making other more impactful decisions on the business.

Finally, with regard to the loss of integrity of data relating to corrective instructions on machine setting parameters (IC.7), the situation is similar to that of DC2 where significant business impacts could occur in terms of quality degradation of products, violation of standards and regulations in the field of safety and pollution, and commercial agreements with customers. Therefore, manufacturers will incur greater production waste (IC.2) and sales losses (IC.3) due to the poor quality of products produced, as well as financial penalties (IC.4) for having breached standards and regulations, or commercial agreements on product specifications.

#### 4.3.3. Loss of data availability

The loss of availability of one or more categories of machine input data, such as product design information (DC1), machine setting parameters (DC2) and operations sequence (DC3), could result in loss of productive time, as all these data are necessary to start and run the manufacturing process. Moreover, there may be a consequent violation of commercial agreements with customers on product delivery time, as well as a quality degradation of workpieces due to the manufacturing process interruption. Therefore, it will be required time-and-money consuming activities to restore the system functionalities (IC.5) and to deal with the increased inventory levels of raw materials (IC.6), which are waiting to be processed. Moreover, costs for lost sales (IC.3) due to the block of manufacturing operations, financial penalties (IC.4) for having violated commercial agreements, and greater production waste (IC.2) in the event of quality degradation of workpieces will have to be taken into account.

At the same way, by focusing on machine output data, such as machine working parameters (DC4), machine components' status (DC5) and workpiece properties (DC6), and on machine corrective instructions (DC7), their loss of availability could cause a loss of production time due to unexpected machine downtime. As a result, there may be a possible violation of commercial agreements with customers on delivery time. This depends on the fact that no predictive maintenance activity on machines can be carried out. Therefore, manufacturers will incur financial efforts for restoring system functionalities (IC.5), loss of sales (IC.3) and higher inventory levels (IC.6) due to machines downtime, and non-compliance

<span id="page-8-0"></span>Security requirements, related business impacts and impacts assessment methods in I-4.0 contexts.

| Security requirements                                                                 | Business impacts (BI)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Assessment methods                                                                                                                                                                                                      |  |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--|
| Confidentiality:<br>protection of information from<br>unauthorized disclosure         | BI.1. Theft of industrial trade secrets and intellectual<br>property:<br>BI.1.1 Reduction of company competitive advantage.<br>BI.1.2 Damage to company image and reputation.<br>BI.1.3 Violation of commercial agreements with industrial                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Qualitative assessment of Impacts Magnitude (IM):<br>IM.1. Loss of strategical knowledge on processes and<br>products<br>IM.2.Negative impact on stakeholder behaviour<br>Quantitative assessment of Impacts Cost (IC): |  |
| Integrity:<br>Protection of information from<br>improper modification                 | partners on data confidentiality.<br>BI.2. Sabotage of the entire critical infrastructure or<br>specific machines and components:<br>BI.2.1 Damages to working machines.<br>BI.2.2 Quality degradation of products.<br>BI.2.3 Violation of standard and regulations in the field of<br>safety and pollution.<br>BI.2.4 Violation of the commercial agreements with<br>customers on product specifications.<br>BI.2.5 Life-threatening situations for workers. | IC.4. Financial penalties<br>Quantitative assessment of Impacts Cost (IC):<br>IC.1. Repairing the physical systems<br>IC.2. Higher production waste<br>IC.3. Lost sales<br>IC.4. Financial penalties                    |  |
| Availability:<br>Protection of data in order to be<br>accessible and usable on demand | BI.3. Denial of service of networks, system devices or any<br>other computational resource:<br>BI.3.1 Loss of productive time.<br>BI.3.2 Violation of the commercial agreements with<br>customers on delivery time.<br>BI.3.3 Quality degradation of the workpieces.                                                                                                                                                                                          | Quantitative assessment of Impacts Cost (IC):<br>IC.5. Restoring the system functionalities<br>IC.6. Higher inventory levels<br>IC.3. Lost sales<br>IC.4. Financial penalties<br>IC.2. Higher production waste          |  |

with commercial agreements with customers on delivery time (IC.4).

#### 4.4. Business impact level assessment

Once the impact matrix has been defined, which provides an overview of the business impacts associated with the loss of data security requirements in the context of Industry 4.0, the level of such impacts needs to be assessed. In order to achieve this goal, the focus is on the matrix values definition (i.e., Impacts Cost and Impacts Magnitude).

According to the NIST's Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments ([Ross,](#page-13-0) [2012\),](#page-13-0) the level of impact of a threat event can be defined as "the magnitude of harm that can be expected to resultfrom the consequences of unauthorized disclosure ofinformation, unauthorized modification of information, unauthorized destruction of information, or loss of information or information system availability".

Although the way to calculate the different business impacts can be formalized, the impacts level (i.e. the matrix values) depends on the company, and in particular on the type and complexity of the manufacturing processes and products realized, or on the market strategies adopted into the referring industry. Moreover, in line with the impact matrix, the values related to the impact costs change according to the combination of the data category under evaluation and the security requirements being breached (confidentiality, integrity or availability). For instance, IC.4 in BI.2.4 will be calculated using the same formula as IC.4 in BI.3.2 but will lead to different results.

In the following, the main points to focus on in order to estimate the business impacts level are treated; they are based on the quantitative and qualitative assessment methods introduced in sub-section 4.2.1.

#### 4.4.1. Quantitative method

As emerged in 4.2.1, the quantitative method to be adopted for evaluating the business impacts level in the context of Industry 4.0 involves the assessment of the following impact costs:

- IC.1. Repairing the physical systems;
- IC.2. Higher production waste;
- IC.3. Lost sales;
- IC.4. Financial penalties;
- IC.5. Restoring the system functionalities;

• IC.6. Higher inventory levels.

For each of these impact costs, a classification of the main terms associated with them is provided (see [Table](#page-10-0) 5).

In particular, repairing the physical systems (IC.1) includes a set of direct costs related to the machine repairing, such as those of removing broken parts, their disposal, the cost of spare parts, as well as the costs of installing and testing new parts. In other words, these costs are calculated as the sum of costs of all spare parts and man-hours spent in replacement activities:

$$
IC.1. = \sum_{i=1}^{n} (cr_i + ch_i)
$$

where, cr is the cost for the spare part, ch is the cost of the manhours used to replace the part (such as the sum of the time needed to remove and dispose of the broken parts, install and test the new ones); while, i represents the number of parts to be replaced in a given timeframe.

Then, if the production waste, due to the quality degradation of products or workpieces, is higher than the normal working conditions (IC.2), some additional costs must be considered relating to the scrap materials produced for each defective product and the inventory need for defective products.

$$
IC.2. = \sum_{j=1}^{n} (cm_j + cj)
$$

In the IC.2 formula, cm is the cost of the scrap materials associated with each product, ci is the cost for storing the defective product; while, j represents the number of defective products realized in a given timeframe.

On the other hand, loss of sales (IC.3) means taking into consideration the costs associated with loss of profit for each product that is not sold because of an interruption in production.

$$
IC.3. = \sum_{k=1}^{n} cp_k
$$

In this case, cp is the cost equal to the selling price of each product realized and k is the number of products realized in a given timeframe.

<span id="page-9-0"></span>

| Table 4         |  |
|-----------------|--|
| Impacts matrix. |  |

| Data categories                                                       | Loss of confidentiality                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Loss of integrity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | Loss of availability                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| DC1<br>Product design<br>information                                  | BI.1.1 Reduction of company<br>competitive advantage.<br>IM.1. Loss of strategical<br>knowledge on products and<br>their making process.<br>BI.1.2 Damage to company<br>image and reputation.<br>IM.2. Negative impact on<br>customers' behaviour.<br>BI.1.3 Violation of commercial<br>agreements with customers on<br>data confidentiality<br>IC.4. Financial penalties | BI.2.2 Quality degradation of products.<br>IC.2. Higher production waste<br>IC.3. Lost sales<br>BI.2.4 Violation of the commercial agreements<br>with customers on product specifications.<br>IC.4. Financial penalties                                                                                                                                                                          | BI.3.1 Loss of productive time.<br>IC.5. Restoring the system functionalities<br>IC.6. Higher inventory levels for raw materials<br>(or supplies)<br>IC.3. Lost sales<br>BI.3.2 Violation of the commercial agreements<br>with customers on delivery time.<br>IC.4. Financial penalties<br>BI.3.3 Quality degradation of the workpieces.<br>IC.2. Higher production waste |
| DC2<br>Machine setting<br>parameters                                  | /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | BI.2.2 Quality degradation of products.<br>IC.2. Higher production waste<br>IC.3. Lost sales<br>BI.2.3 Violation of standard and regulations in<br>the field of safety and pollution.<br>IC 4. Financial penalties<br>BI.2.4 Violation of the commercial agreements<br>with customers on product specifications.<br>IC.4. Financial penalties<br>BI.2.5 Life-threatening situations for workers. | BI.3.1 Loss of productive time.<br>IC.5. Restoring the system functionalities<br>IC.6. Higher inventory levels for raw materials<br>(or supplies)<br>IC.3. Lost sales<br>BI.3.2 Violation of the commercial agreements<br>with customers on delivery time.<br>IC.4. Financial penalties<br>BI.3.3 Quality degradation of the workpieces.<br>IC.2. Higher production waste |
| DC3<br>Machine<br>operations<br>sequence                              | /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | IC.4. Financial penalties<br>BI.2.1 Damages to working machines.<br>IC.1. Repairing the physical systems<br>BI.2.3 Violation of standard and regulations in<br>the field of safety and pollution.<br>IC.4. Financial penalties<br>BI.2.5 Life-threatening situations for workers.<br>IC.4. Financial penalties                                                                                   | BI.3.1 Loss of productive time.<br>IC.5. Restoring the system functionalities<br>IC.6. Higher inventory levels for raw materials<br>(or supplies)<br>IC.3. Lost sales<br>BI.3.2 Violation of the commercial agreements<br>with customers on delivery time.<br>IC.4. Financial penalties<br>BI.3.3 Quality degradation of the workpieces.<br>IC.2. Higher production waste |
| DC4<br>Machine working<br>parameters                                  | BI.1.2 Damage to company<br>image and reputation.<br>IM.2. Negative impact on<br>customers and investors<br>behaviour.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | BI.3.1 Loss of productive time (no predictive<br>maintenance on machines)<br>IC.5. Restoring the system functionalities<br>IC.6. Higher inventory levels for semi-finished<br>goods<br>IC.3. Lost sales<br>BI.3.2 Violation of the commercial agreements<br>with customers on delivery time.<br>IC.4. Financial penalties                                                 |
| DC5<br>Machine<br>components'<br>status                               | BI.1.2 Damage to company<br>image and reputation.<br>IM.2. Negative impact on<br>customers and investors<br>behaviour.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | BI.3.1 Loss of productive time (no predictive<br>maintenance on machines)<br>IC.5. Restoring the system functionalities<br>IC.6. Higher inventory levels for semi-finished<br>goods<br>IC.3. Lost sales<br>BI.3.2 Violation of the commercial agreements<br>with customers on delivery time.<br>IC.4. Financial penalties                                                 |
| DC6<br>Workpiece<br>properties                                        | BI.1.1 Reduction of company<br>competitive advantage.<br>IM.1. Loss of strategical<br>knowledge on products quality.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | BI.3.1 Loss of productive time (no predictive<br>maintenance on machines)<br>IC.5. Restoring the system functionalities<br>IC.6. Higher inventory levels for semi-finished<br>goods<br>IC.3. Lost sales<br>BI.3.2 Violation of the commercial agreements<br>with customers on delivery time.<br>IC.4. Financial penalties                                                 |
| DC7<br>Corrective<br>instructions on<br>machine setting<br>parameters | /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | BI.2.2 Quality degradation of products.<br>IC.2. Higher production waste<br>IC.3. Lost sales<br>BI.2.3 Violation of standard and regulations in<br>the field of safety and pollution.<br>IC 4. Financial penalties<br>BI.2.4 Violation of the commercial agreements<br>with customers on product specifications.<br>IC.4. Financial penalties                                                    | BI.3.1 Loss of productive time (no predictive<br>maintenance on machines)<br>IC.5. Restoring the system functionalities<br>IC.6. Higher inventory levels for semi-finished<br>goods<br>IC.3. Lost sales<br>BI.3.2 Violation of the commercial agreements<br>with customers on delivery time.<br>IC.4. Financial penalties                                                 |

<span id="page-10-0"></span>Impact costs description.

| Impact cost                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Formula                                                                      | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| n<br><br>(cri + chi)<br>IC 1. (Repairing the physical systems) =<br>i=1<br>n | cr = spare part cost<br>ch = cost of the man-hours spent for the replacement of parts (removal and disposal of broken<br>parts, installation and testing of new parts)<br>i = number of parts to be replaced                                                                                                                             |
| <br>(cmj + cij)<br>IC 2. (Higher production waste) =<br>j=1<br>n             | cm = cost of the scrap materials associated with each product<br>ci = cost of storage of the defective product<br>j = number of defective products realized                                                                                                                                                                              |
| <br>cpk<br>IC 3. (Lost sales) =<br>k=1<br>n<br>m                             | cp = product selling price<br>k = number of products realized                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| <br><br>csl +<br>caq<br>IC 4. (Financial penalties) =<br>l=1<br>q=1          | cs = fees paid for having breached safety and pollution regulations<br>ca = fees paid for having breached agreements with customers<br>l = number of safety and pollution regulations breached<br>q = number of agreements with customers breached                                                                                       |
| IC 5. (Restoring the system functionalities) = cj + ce + co<br>n             | cj = cost of man-hours spent on restoring the system<br>ce = cost for the purchase of hardware and software<br>co = cost of training the staff and/or outsourcing of the system maintenance service                                                                                                                                      |
| <br>(cc + ctp + cdp)<br>IC 6. (Higher inventory levels) =<br>p=1             | cc = cost for the space required for the storage of the single component or semi-finished good<br>ct = cost for the transport and handling that component or semi-finished good<br>cd = cost of taking risks of deterioration and/or obsolescence of that component or<br>semi-finished good<br>p = number of surplus parts to be stored |

With regard to the financial penalties (IC.4) imposed on companies for breaching safety and pollution regulations (until creating life-threatening situations for workers), or for failing to comply agreements with customers regarding data confidentiality, product specifications or delivery time, you can refer to the following formula:

$$
IC.4. = \sum_{l=1}^{n} cs_l + \sum_{q=1}^{m} ca_q
$$

where, cs and ca are respectively the fees paid by the company for breaching safety and pollution regulations, and agreements with industrial partners; while, l is the number of safety and pollution regulations breached and q is the number of agreements with partners not respected, in a given timeframe.

Moreover, the restoration of system functionalities (IC.5) includes the costs of man-hours used in the restoring tasks, and the purchase of system hardware or software licenses (if necessary). Where advanced technical skills not available within the company are required, additional costs for staff training and/or outsourcing of the system maintenance service have to be taken into consideration.

$$
IC.5.=cj+ce+co
$$

where, cj is the costfor the man-hours spentin the system restoring activities, ce is the cost for purchasing hardware and software, and co is the cost for the training of personnel and/or outsourcing of the system maintenance service, in a given timeframe.

Finally, when inventory levels of raw materials (or supplies), semi-finished goods are higher than expected (IC.6), some additional costs are incurred for the space needed to store surplus inventory, for transport and handling them, as well as for taking risks of deterioration and/or obsolescence of parts. n

$$
IC.6. = \sum_{p=1}^{n} (cc_p + ct_p + cd_p)
$$

The terms cc and ct are respectively the costs associated with the space required to store each component (as surplus inventory) and to transport and handle it; while, cd is the cost for taking risks of deterioration and/or obsolescence of that component or semifinished good. In this case, p is the number of surplus parts to be stored, in a given timeframe.

## 4.4.2. Qualitative method

With the aim at qualitatively assessing the business impacts level in the context of Industry 4.0, the impacts magnitude has to be considered with reference to:

- IM 1. Loss of strategical knowledge on processes and products;
- IM 2. Negative impact on stakeholder behaviour.

It is necessary to underline that the impact magnitude depends on the specific data category.

In general, the impacts magnitude can be "low", "medium" or "high". The NIST's Risk Management Guide for Information Technology Systems [\(Stoneburmer](#page-14-0) et [al.,](#page-14-0) [2002\)](#page-14-0) provides the following description of the three main impact categories:

- High level of impact: exercise of the vulnerability (1) may result in the highly costly loss of major tangible assets or resources; (2) may significantly violate, harm, or impede an organization's mission, reputation, or interest; or (3) may result in human death or serious injury.
- Medium level of impact: exercise of the vulnerability (1) may result in the costly loss of tangible assets or resources; (2) may violate, harm, or impede an organization's mission, reputation, or interest; or (3) may result in human injury.
- Low level of impact: exercise ofthe vulnerability (1) may resultin the loss of some tangible assets or resources or (2) may noticeably affect an organization's mission, reputation, or interest.

In this study, the expression "exercise of the vulnerability" defines the condition for which one or more security requirements (i.e., confidentiality, integrity, or availability) related to the specific data category have been breached.

| Data Category: Machine Operations Sequence<br><b>Business Impacts Summary Report</b><br><b>Business Impacts due to Loss of Data Availability</b> |                                                                                     |                                                                                         |  |  |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--|--|
|                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                     | IC.5. Restoring the system functionalities: $37k\epsilon$                               |  |  |
|                                                                                                                                                  | BI.3.1 - Loss of productive time.                                                   | IC.6. Higher inventory levels for raw materials: $19k \in$<br>IC.3. Lost sales: $125kE$ |  |  |
|                                                                                                                                                  | BI.3.2 - Violation of the commercial agreements<br>with customers on delivery time. | IC.4. Financial penalties: $140k\varepsilon$                                            |  |  |
|                                                                                                                                                  | BI.3.3 - Quality degradation of the workpieces.                                     | IC.2. Higher production waste: $7.5kE$                                                  |  |  |
| <b>Business Impacts due to Loss of Data Integrity</b>                                                                                            |                                                                                     |                                                                                         |  |  |
|                                                                                                                                                  | BI.2.1 - Damages to working machines.                                               | IC.1. Repairing the physical systems: 10.5 k $\epsilon$                                 |  |  |
|                                                                                                                                                  | BI.2.3 - Violation of standard and regulations in                                   |                                                                                         |  |  |
|                                                                                                                                                  | the field of safety and pollution.                                                  | IC.4. Financial penalties: $140k\varepsilon$                                            |  |  |
|                                                                                                                                                  | BI.2.5 - Life-threatening situations for workers.                                   |                                                                                         |  |  |

**Fig. 4.** Business Impacts Summary Report for Machine Operations Sequence.

### 4.4.3. Example of application in a hypothetical scenario

For supporting the meaning and value of the proposed indicators, their application in a hypothetical scenario is provided. The reference scenario is represented by a manufacturing line consisting of three CNC machines.

Inthis industrial scenario,the ProgramManagerdecides tomake an evaluation of the business impacts due to cyber-attacks violating the integrity and availability of data related to the sequence of machine operations (DC3). For this reason,he asks the Product Planning and Control unit to collaborate with the Finance and Business unit in order to provide a summary of these impacts in the second quarter of the year. At this time of the year, the production intensity is very high and customer requests are usually very restrictive, so the company needs to operate with maximum efficiency. In particular, the company is concerned about a loss of data availability that can prevent access and use of data when necessary, following production planning. On the other hand, this can determine a loss of production time, a violation of the commercial agreements with customers on delivery time and a deterioration in the quality of parts. Moreover, the company is also concerned about a loss of data integrity related to the inability to protect the sequence of the machine operations from inadequate modifications. This can cause damages to operating machines, violation of standard and regulations in the field of safety and pollution and life-threatening situations for workers using machines.

The impact costs for loss of data availability on the machine operations sequence can be summarized in the costs of restoring system functionalities, higher inventory levels for raw materials, loss of sales, financial penalties and higher production waste, as calculated in table below [\(Table](#page-12-0) 6).

Considering, instead, the loss of integrity of data related to the sequence of operations of the machine, the impacts costs can be the result of the costs of repair of physical systems and financial penalties paid as shown in the following table ([Table](#page-12-0) 7).

The Production Planning and Control unit has synthesized these values for the Program Manager in the summary report shown in Fig. 4.

The Program Manager will use these data to evaluate the business impacts that canbe generated by a cyber-attack to themachine operations sequence and to address the appropriate actions in terms of planning the next project activities and defining company strategies for the protection of these data.

## **5. Discussion for future analysis**

The results described in the previous section provide a pragmatic and complete picture of the assets/impacts and their relationshipbased onthe explored context. These results are also an important source of reference and starting point for leading future

**Fig. 5.** Proposal of a flow of steps for future analysis.

analysis in other Industry 4.0 contexts similar to or different from the analysed manufacturing cell.

To provide preliminary suggestions to this end to scientists, practitioners, consultants andindustrialmanagers incybersecurity, we suggest structuring the results into a four-step methodology (see Fig. 5). In particular, each step can represent an element to assess the business impact level, making companies aware of the critical assets on which to focus their defensive efforts.

As first step, we suggestthe analysis of critical assets involved in cybersecurity issues in the industrial context of reference. Indeed, any cybersecurity breach of such assets, by exploiting systems' vulnerabilities, may negatively affect the business performance.

Parallel to the first, a second step can consist in characterizing the business impacts for each security requirement (i.e., data confidentiality, integrity and availability) breached in reference to manufacturing data and systems.

In a third step, instead, essential assets affected by cyber threats to the specific business impacts can be related. Business impacts may occur in case of a breach of security requirements. This analysis suggests the definition of an impact matrix.

Finally, the goal of a fourth step should be to define the business impacts level, by adopting the proposed quantitative and qualitative assessment indicators.

For implementing each step in an industrial environment, different types of analysis can be suggested [\(Table](#page-12-0) 8). In particular, for the first and second steps, itis relevantthe involvement of company key informants in focus groups in order to detail the critical data categories and business impacts introduced in this study. Instead, for the third step, an on-line survey can be conducted for addressing the company key informants with the aim to match critical data with the business impacts that could occur in case of cybersecurity breaches. Finally, the fourth and last step could be based on semi-structured interviews with company experts to estimate the business impacts' costs and magnitude, according to the indicators proposed in this study. In order to gather information relevant to define the impact costs, semi-structured interviews should be used to learn about product and manufacturing process information,features of Information and Technology systems, inventory levels and sales strategies from a supply chain management perspective, as

<span id="page-12-0"></span>Impact costs calculus for business impacts due to loss of availability.

| Business impact: loss of productive time (BI.3.1)                                                    |                                                              |                                                                    |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Illustrative input Data<br>cj = 10 kD<br>ce = 4 kD                                                   |                                                              | Indicators<br>IC 5. (Restoring the system functionalities) = 37 kD |
| co = 23 kD<br>p = 3<br>cc = 5 kD                                                                     |                                                              | IC 6. (Higher inventory levels) = 19 kD                            |
| ct = 1 kD , 1 kD , 2 kD<br>cd = 2 kD , 3 kD , 2 kD<br>k = 2<br>cp = 60kD , 65kD                      |                                                              | IC 3. (Lost sales) = 125 kD                                        |
| Business impact: violation of the commercial agreements with customers on delivery time (BI.3.2)     |                                                              |                                                                    |
| Illustrative input Data<br>l = 2<br>cs = 15kD , 25kD<br>q = 1<br>ca = 100kD                          |                                                              | Indicator<br>IC 4. (Financial penalties) = 140kD                   |
| Business impact: quality degradation of the workpieces (BI.3.3)                                      |                                                              |                                                                    |
| Illustrative Input Data<br>j = 2<br>cm = 1kD , 1.5kD<br>ci = 2kD , 3kD                               |                                                              | Indicator<br>IC 2. (Higher production waste) = 7.5kD               |
| Table 7<br>Impact costs calculus for business impacts due to loss of integrity.                      |                                                              |                                                                    |
| Business impact: damages to working machines (BI.2.1)                                                |                                                              |                                                                    |
| Illustrative input Data<br>cr = 1kD , 0.5kD , 1kD ch = 3kD , 2kD , 3kD i = 3                         | Indicator<br>IC 1. (Repairing the physical systems) = 10.5kD |                                                                    |
| Business impact: violation of standard and regulations in the field of safety and pollution (BI.2.3) |                                                              |                                                                    |
| Illustrative input Data<br>l = 2cs = 15kD , 25kD q = 1ca = 100kD                                     | Indicator<br>IC 4. (Financial penalties) = 140kD             |                                                                    |
| Business impact: life-threatening situations for workers (BI.2.5)                                    |                                                              |                                                                    |
| Illustrative input Data<br>l = 2cs = 15kD , 25kD q = 1ca = 100kD                                     | Indicator<br>IC 4. (Financial penalties) = 140kD             |                                                                    |
| Table 8<br>Insights for steps accomplishment.                                                        |                                                              |                                                                    |
|                                                                                                      |                                                              |                                                                    |

| Type of analysis                         | 1 – Results for industrial applications                     | 2 - How they will be achieved |
|------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| Step 1. Critical Assets Analysis         | Critical manufacturing data categories to be protected      | Focus groups                  |
| Step 2. Business Impact Analysis         | Business impacts to focus on                                | Focus groups                  |
| Step 3. Impact Matrix Definition         | Business impacts associated with the specific data category | On-line survey                |
| Step 4. Business Impact Level Assessment | Business impacts cost and magnitude estimates               | Semi-structured interviews    |
|                                          |                                                             |                               |

well as to investigate on legislative, system and security-related documentation of the company. On the other hand, with the aim to collect information relevant for evaluating the impact magnitude, the semi-structured interviews should be carried out with technical and nontechnical management staff. The management, in fact, has an overall view of the confidential data owned by the company, which if known by other actors (i.e. suppliers, customers or competitors)in the industry could cause a loss of competitive advantage or a damage to the image and reputation of the company.

Therefore, taking advantage of the results obtained from this study, companies could benefit from it as follows: characterizing the proper critical manufacturing data to be protected from cyber-attacks; isolating the business impacts to focus on in case of cybersecurity breaches; defining the business impacts due to the specific data category breach; and estimating the business impacts' costs and magnitude. To achieve these benefits, appropriate steps of application and methods of analysis can be defined and carried out, as discussed above.

#### **6. Conclusion**

Nowadays, cybersecurity is one ofthemainchallenges that companies approaching the Industry 4.0 paradigm have to deal with in order to preserve their competitiveness.

Over the last years, European and international standard bodies have defined standards and guidance documents in order to create a common vision of the cybersecurity controls needed in the industry, as well as methods to assess the effectiveness of these controls.

The management of cybersecurity in Industry 4.0 is also an emerging and relevant topic in the recent literature. In fact, although the literature analysis suggests that there are a significant number of methodological solutions to address cybersecurity issues in the context of Industry 4.0, none of them focuses on security issues by linking the critical assets to be protected from cyber-attacks and the resulting business impacts providing also a measure of them. For instance, the hierarchical model for risks <span id="page-13-0"></span>assessment proposed by Zhu and Basar (2011) details the boundaries of the system to be protected based on six layers of analysis (physical, control, communication, network, supervisory and management), but does not pay attention to the business impacts related to the cybersecurity breach of each layer. In the same way, the framework proposed by Babiceanu and Seker (2017) for addressing systems' cybersecurity and resilience focuses on system identification, resilience objective setting, vulnerability analysis, and stakeholder engagement, but does not analyse the business impacts of cyber-attacks.

Instead, the impact assessment model of (Radanliev et al. (2018a); [Radanliev](#page-14-0) et [al.](#page-14-0) [\(2018b\)\)](#page-14-0) calculates the economic impact of the Internet of Things (IoT) cyber risk, but does not correlate such impact cost with the loss of critical data associated with the Cyber-Physical System affected by cyber threats.

Therefore, the ethnographic observation of the aeronautical manufacturing cells (considered a case study representative of the Industry 4.0), as well as the literature review, have made it possible to obtain a four-steps methodology to assess the business impact level due to cybersecurity breaches in 4.0-manufacturing environments. The proposed impacts assessment methodology provides useful guidance for companies in addressing cybersecurity issues in the context of Industry 4.0, assessing cyber risks according to NIST's asset/impact-oriented approach. The methodology is based on the analysis of critical assets to be protected against cyber-attacks, negative business impactsdue to cybersecurity breaches andthe way in which these two elements are related, providing companies with a useful approach for assessing the cost/level of impacts and support the decision making process.

It is expected that the results of this paper will support companies in facing cybersecurity issues affecting the Industry 4.0, while involving technical and nontechnical management staff in the decision making process. In particular, the application of the methodology within networked manufacturing contexts could steer companies towards targeted investments in the field of cybersecurity.

However, the methodology does not take into account the exploitable weaknesses/deficits of networked manufacturing systems, nor does itidentify the cyber threat events that could exercise such vulnerabilities. The next step of research will consist in extending the methodology to include new steps of action also in this direction.

Moreover, since this study focuses on CNC manufacturing systems, the application of the methodology in industrial environments based on different production technologies (such as additive manufacturing) could give rise to different results in the assessment of business impacts. In fact, if the critical data associated with different types of manufacturing machines are the same, as well as the potential business impacts due to the loss of confidentiality, integrity and availability of such data, their combination in the impacts matrix changes depending on the production technology and business strategy. Similarly, the cost and magnitude of the impacts identified in the matrix changes. In order to expand the study, future research will apply the methodology in a 4.0 manufacturing environment where the business impacts level due to cybersecurity breaches can be assessed as a function of the change in the type of machines connected to the network. Finally, the application ofthe methodology requires the involvement ofthe company's key informants in a series of activities, such as participation in focus groups, filling in online questionnaires, carrying out semi-structured interviews. In order to obtain a good response rate, and therefore consistent results, it is necessary to have the support of top management. In other words, the management of cybersecurity issues will need to be a strategic and operational priority for the company.

#### **Declaration of competing interest**

None declared.

#### **References**

- MForesight, Computing Community Consortium (CCC), 2017. [Cybersecurity](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0005) [for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0005) [Manufacturers:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0005) [Securing](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0005) [the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0005) [Digitized](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0005) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0005) [Connected](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0005) [Factory.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0005) [ThomasMahoney](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0005) - [MForesight.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0005)
- Cisco, 2017. ["Cisco](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0010) [2017](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0010) [Midyear](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0010) [Cybersecurity](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0010) [Report,"](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0010) [Cisco](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0010) [and/or](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0010) [Its](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0010) [Affiliates.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0010) EEF (The Manufactureres' Organisation), 2018. [Cyber](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0015) [Security](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0015) [for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0015) [Manufacturing.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0015) [EEF.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0015)
- Ponemon Institute LLC (jointly developed by Accenture), 2017. ["2017](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0020) [Cost](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0020) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0020) [Cyber](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0020) [Crime](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0020) [Study,"](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0020) [Accenture.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0020)
- Lezzi, M., Lazoi, M., Corallo, A., 2018. [Cybersecurity](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0025) [for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0025) [Industry](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0025) [4.0](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0025) [in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0025) [the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0025) [current](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0025) [literature:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0025) [a](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0025) [reference](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0025) [framework.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0025) [Comput.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0025) [Ind.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0025) [103,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0025) [97](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0025)–[110.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0025)
- Barbier, J., Buckalew, L., Loucks, J., Moriarty, R., O'Connell, K., Riegel, M., 2016. [Cyber](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0030)[security](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0030) [As](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0030) [a](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0030) [Growth](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0030) [Advantage.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0030) [CISCO.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0030)
- Waslo, R., Lewis, T., Hajj, R., Carton, R., 2017. [Industry](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0035) [4.0](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0035) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0035) [Cybersecurity.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0035) [Man](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0035)[aging](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0035) [Risk](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0035) [in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0035) [an](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0035) [Age](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0035) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0035) [Connected](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0035) [Production.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0035) [Deloitte](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0035) [University](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0035) [Press.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0035)
- Deloitte, 2018. [Risk](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0040) [Survey](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0040) [2018.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0040) [Transforming](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0040) [Risks](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0040) [into](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0040) [Opportunities.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0040) [Deloitte.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0040) European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA), 2011. [Protecting](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0045) [Industrial](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0045) [Control](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0045) [Systems](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0045) - [Annex](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0045) [III:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0045) [ICS](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0045) [Security](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0045) [Related](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0045) [Standards,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0045) [Guide](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0045)[lines](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0045) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0045) [Policy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0045) [Documents.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0045) [ENISA.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0045)
- E.C.S. Organisation, 2017. [State](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0050) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0050) [the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0050) [Art](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0050) [Syllabus](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0050) [-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0050) [Overview](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0050) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0050) [Existing](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0050) [Cyberse](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0050)[curity](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0050) [Standards](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0050) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0050) [Certification](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0050) [Schemes.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0050) [ECSO.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0050)
- Ross, R.S., 2012. ["NIST](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0055) [Special](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0055) [Publication](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0055) [800-30.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0055) [Guide](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0055) [for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0055) [Conducting](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0055) [Risk](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0055) [Assess](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0055)[ments.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0055) [National](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0055) [Institute](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0055) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0055) [Standards](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0055) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0055) [Technology.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0055)
- Marketsand Markets, 2015. [Aviation](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [Cyber](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [Security](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [Market](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [by](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [Component](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [\(Service,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [Solution\),](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [by](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [Deployment](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [\(On-Cloud,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [On-premise\),](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [&](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [by](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [Region](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [\(North](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [America,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [Europe,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [Asia-pacific,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [Middle](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [East](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [&](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [Africa,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [Latin](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [America\)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [Forecast](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [to](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [2020.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [Marketsand](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060) [Markets.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0060)
- European Union Agency for Networked and Information Security (ENISA), 2018. ["Good](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0065) [Practice](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0065) [for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0065) [Security](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0065) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0065) [Internet](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0065) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0065) [Things](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0065) [in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0065) [the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0065) [Context](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0065) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0065) [Smart](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0065) [Manu](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0065)[facturing,"](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0065) [ENISA.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0065)
- Behrendt, A., Müller, N., Odenwälder, P., Schmitz, C., 2017. [Industry](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0070) [4.0](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0070) [demystified—lean's](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0070) [next](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0070) [level,"](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0070) [McKinsey&Company,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0070) [March](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0070) [\[Online\].](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0070) [Available:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0070) [https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/operations/our](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0070)[insights/industry-4-0-demystified-leans-next-level.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0070) [\[Accessed](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0070) [12](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0070) [June](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0070) [2018\].](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0070)
- Tuptuk, N., Hailes, S., 2018. [Security](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0075) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0075) [smart](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0075) [manufacturing](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0075) [systems.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0075) [J.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0075) [Manuf.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0075) [Syst.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0075) [47,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0075) [93](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0075)–[106.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0075)
- Wu, D., Ren, A., Zhang, W., Fan, F., Liu, P., Fu, X., 2018. [Cybersecurity](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0080) [for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0080) [digital](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0080) [manufacturing.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0080) [J.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0080) [Manuf.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0080) [Syst.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0080) [48,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0080) [3](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0080)–[12.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0080)
- Sullivan, D., Luiijf, E., Colbert, E.J.M., 2016. [Components](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0085) [ofIndustrial](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0085) [Control](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0085) [Systems.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0085) [In:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0085) [Cyber-security](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0085) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0085) [SCADA](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0085) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0085) [Other](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0085) [Industrial](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0085) [Control](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0085) [Systems.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0085) [Springer,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0085) [Cham,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0085) [pp.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0085) [15–28.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0085)
- ISA, North Carolina 2016. ["The](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0090) [62443](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0090) [Series](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0090) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0090) [Standards,"](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0090) [ISA.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0090)
- Theron, P., Lazari, A., 2018. [The](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0095) [IACS](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0095) [Cybersecurity](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0095) [Certification](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0095) [Framework](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0095) [\(ICCF\):](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0095) [Lessons](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0095) [from](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0095) [the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0095) [2017](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0095) [Study](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0095) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0095) [the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0095) [State](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0095) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0095) [the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0095) [Art.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0095) [European](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0095) [Commission.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0095)
- ANSSI, 2012. ["Managing](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0100) [Cybersecurty](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0100) [for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0100) [Industrial](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0100) [Control](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0100) [Systems,"](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0100) [ANSSI.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0100)
- ANSSI, 2014a. [Classification](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0105) [Method](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0105) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0105) [Key](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0105) [Measures,"](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0105) [ANSSI.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0105)
- ANSSI, 2014b. ["Detailed](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0110) [Measures,"](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0110) [ANSSI.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0110)
- American Petroleum Institute (API), 2016. [API](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0115) [STD](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0115) [1164,"](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0115) [American](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0115) [Petroleum](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0115) [Insti](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0115)[tute](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0115) [\(API\).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0115)
- Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik (BSI), 2013. [ICS](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0120) [Security](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0120) [Com](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0120)[pendium.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0120) [Federal](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0120) [Office](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0120) [for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0120) [Information](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0120) [Security](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0120) [\(BSI\).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0120)
- U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 2011. [Catalog](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0125) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0125) [Control](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0125) [System](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0125) [Security:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0125) [Reccommendations](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0125) [for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0125) [Standards](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0125) [Developers.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0125) [Homeland](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0125) [Security.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0125)
- IndustrialControl SystemsCyber EmergencyResponse Team, 2016.[ICS-CERTAnnual](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0130) [Assessment](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0130) [Report,"](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0130) [National](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0130) [Cybersecurity](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0130) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0130) [Communications](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0130) [Integration](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0130) [Center](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0130) [\(NCCIC\).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0130)
- Stouffer, k., Pillitteri, V., Lightman, S., Abrams, M., Hahn, A., 2015. ["NIST](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0135) [Special](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0135) [Pub](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0135)[lication](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0135) [800-82.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0135) [Guide](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0135) [to](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0135) [Industrial](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0135) [Control](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0135) [Systems](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0135) [\(ICS\)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0135) [Security,"](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0135) [National](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0135) [Institute](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0135) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0135) [Standard](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0135) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0135) [Technology](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0135) [\(NIST\).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0135)
- NIST, 2013. [NIST](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140) [Special](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140) [Publication](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140) [800-53.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140) [Security](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140) [Privacy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140) [Controls](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140) [for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140) [Fed](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140)[eral](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140) [Information](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140) [Systems](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140) [Organizations.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140) [National](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140) [Institute](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140) [Standards](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140) [Technology.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0140)
- NIST, 2018. [Framework](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0145) [for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0145) [Improving](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0145) [Critical](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0145) [Infrastructure](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0145) [Cybersecurity.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0145) [National](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0145) [Institute](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0145) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0145) [Standards](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0145) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0145) [Technology.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0145)
- Babiceanu, R.F., Seker, R., 2017. [Cybersecurity](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [resilience](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [modelling](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [software](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150)[defined](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [networks-based](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [manufacturing](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [application.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [In:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [Service](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [Orientation](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [Holonic](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [Multi-Agent](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [Manufacturing.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [Studies](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [Computational](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [Intelligence.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [Springer,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [Cham,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [pp.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150) [167](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150)–[176.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0150)
- Jansen, C., Jeschke, S., 2018. [Mitigating](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0155) [risks](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0155) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0155) [digitalization](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0155) [through](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0155) [managed](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0155) [industrial](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0155) [security](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0155) [services.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0155) [AI](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0155) [Soc.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0155) [J.,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0155) [1](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0155)–[11.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0155)
- Kobara, K., 2016. [Cyber](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0160) [physical](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0160) [security](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0160) [for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0160) [industrial](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0160) [control](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0160) [systems](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0160) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0160) [IoT.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0160) [IEICE](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0160) [Trans.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0160) [Inf.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0160) [Syst.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0160) [E99D](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0160) [\(4\),](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0160) [787–795.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0160)
- Zhu, Q., Craig, R., Basar, T., 2011. ["A](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0165) [hierarchical](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0165) [security](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0165) [architecture](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0165) [for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0165) [cyber](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0165)[physical](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0165) [systems.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0165) [In:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0165) [2011](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0165) [4th](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0165) [International](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0165) [Symposium](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0165) [on](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0165) [Resilient](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0165) [Control](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0165) [Systems,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0165) [Boise,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0165) [ID,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0165) [USA.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0165)
- Radanliev, P., De Roure, D., Nurse, J.R., Nicolescu, R., Huth, H., Cannady, S., Montalvo, R.M., 2018a. [Integration](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [cyber](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [security](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [frameworks,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [models](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [approaches](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170)

<span id="page-14-0"></span>[for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [building](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [design](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [principles](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [internet-of-things](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [industry](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [4.0.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [In:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [Living](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [Internet](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [Things:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [Cybersecurity](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [IoT](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) - [2018,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170) [London.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0170)

- Radanliev, P., De Roure, D.C., Nicolescu, R., Michael, H., Montalvo, R.M., Cannady, S., Burnap, P., 2018b. [Future](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0175) [developments](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0175) [in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0175) [cyber](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0175) [risk](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0175) [assessmentfor](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0175) [the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0175) [internet](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0175) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0175) [things.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0175) [Comput.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0175) [Ind.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0175) [102,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0175) [14–22.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0175)
- Januario, F., Carvalho, C., Cardoso, A., Gil, P., 2016. [Security](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [challenges](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [SCADA](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [systems](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [over](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [wireless](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [sensor](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [actuator](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [networks.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [International](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [Congress](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [on](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [Ultra](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [Modern](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [Telecommunications](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [Control](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [Systems](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [Workshops](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180) [2016.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0180)
- Ren,A.,Wu, D., Zhang,W., Terpenny,J., Liu, P., 2017.[Cyber](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0185) [security](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0185) [insmartmanufac](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0185)[turing:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0185) [survey](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0185) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0185) [challenges.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0185) [67th](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0185) [Annual](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0185) [Conference](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0185) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0185) [Expo](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0185) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0185) [the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0185) [Institute](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0185) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0185) [Industrial](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0185) [Engineers.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0185)
- Creswell, J.W., Creswell, J.D., 2018. [Research](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0190) [Design,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0190) [Los](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0190) [Angeles.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0190) [SAGE.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0190)
- Butlewski, M., Misztal, A., Belu, N., 2016. [An](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195) [analysis](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195) [the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195) [benefits](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195) [ethnography](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195) [design](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195) [methods](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195) [for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195) [product](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195) [modelling.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195) [IOP](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195) [Conference](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195) [Series:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195) [Materials](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195) [Science](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195) [Engineering,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195) [vol.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195) [145.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0195)
- Blomberg, J., Burrel, M., Guest, G., 2003. [An](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0200) [ethnographic](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0200) [approach](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0200) [to](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0200) [design.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0200) [In:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0200) [The](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0200) [Human-Computer](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0200) [Interaction](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0200) [Handbook.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0200) [Fundamentals,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0200) [Evolving](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0200) [Technologies](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0200) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0200) [Emerging](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0200) [Applications.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0200) [Lawrence](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0200) [Erlbaum](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0200) [Associates,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0200) [Publishers.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0200)
- Mohedas,I.S.S.A., Daly, S.R., Sienko,K.H., 2015.[Applyingdesignethnography](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [toprod](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205)[uct](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [evaluation:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [a](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [case](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [example](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [a](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [medical](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [device](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [a](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [low-resource](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [setting.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [In:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [International](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [Conference](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [on](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [Engineering](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [Design,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [ICED15,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205) [Milan.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0205)
- Kosaka, M., 2012. [In:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [Naidoo,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [Loshini](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [\(Ed.\),](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [A](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [Service](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [Value](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [Creation](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [Model](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [Role](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [Ethnography.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [An](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [Ethnography](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [Global](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [Landscapes](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [Corridors.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210) [InTech.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0210)
- Jones, R., 2006. [Experience](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0215) [models:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0215) [where](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0215) [ethnography](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0215) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0215) [design](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0215) [meet.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0215) [Ethno](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0215)[graphic](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0215) [Praxis](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0215) [in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0215) [Industry](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0215) [Conference](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0215) [Proceedings.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0215)
- Bryman, A., Bell, E., 2015. [Business](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0220) [Research](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0220) [Methods.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0220) [Oxford](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0220) [University](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0220) [Press,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0220) [Oxford.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0220)
- Pfleeger, C.P., P. S. L, M. J, 2015. [Security](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0225) [in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0225) [Computing.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0225) [Prentice](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0225) [Hall.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0225)
- He, H., Maple, C., Watson, T., Tiwari, A., Mehnen, J., Jin, Y., Gabrys, B., 2016. [The](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [security](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [challenges](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [IoT](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [enabled](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [cyber-physical](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [systems](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [opportunities](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [evolutionary](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [computing](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [&](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [other](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [computational](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [intelligence.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [In:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [2016](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [IEEE](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [Congress](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [on](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [Evolutionary](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230) [Computation.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0230)
- Corbò, G., Foglietta, C., Palazzo, C., Panzieri, S., 2017. [Smart](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0235) [behavioral](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0235) [filter](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0235) [for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0235) [industrial](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0235) [internet](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0235) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0235) [things.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0235) [In:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0235) [Mobile](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0235) [Networks](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0235) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0235) [Application.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0235) [Springer,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0235) [pp.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0235) [1](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0235)–[8.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0235)
- Tao, F., Qi, Q., Liu, A., Kusiak, A., 2018. [Data-driven](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0240) [smart](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0240) [manufacturing.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0240) [J.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0240) [Manuf.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0240) [Syst.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0240) [48,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0240) [157](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0240)–[169.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0240)
- Turner, H., White, J., Camelio, J.A., Williams, C., Amos, B.P.R., 2015. [Bad](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0245) [parts:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0245) [are](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0245) [our](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0245) [manufacturing](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0245) [systems](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0245) [at](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0245) [risk](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0245) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0245) [silent](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0245) [cyberattacks?](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0245) [IEEE](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0245) [Secur.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0245) [Priv.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0245) [13](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0245) [\(3\),](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0245) [40–47.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0245)
- Stoneburmer, G., Goguen, A., Feringa, A., 2002. [Risk](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0250) [management](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0250) [guide](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0250) [for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0250) [informa](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0250)[tion](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0250) [technology](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0250) [systems.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0250) [NIST](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0250) [Spec.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0250) [Publ.,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0250) [800–830.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0250)
- Ahmad, A., Bosua, R., Scheepers, R., 2014. [Protecting](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0255) [organizational](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0255) [competitive](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0255) [advantage:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0255) [a](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0255) [knowledge](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0255) [perspective.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0255) [Comput.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0255) [Secur.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0255) [42,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0255) [27–39.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0255)

- Gatzert, N., 2015. [The](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [impact](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [corporate](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [reputation](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [reputation](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [damaging](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [events](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [on](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [financial](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [performance:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [empirical](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [evidence](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [from](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [literature.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [Eur.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [Manag.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [J.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [33](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [\(no.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [6\),](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260) [485](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260)–[499.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0166-3615(19)30442-7/sbref0260)
- Hovav, A., D'Arcy, J., 2003. The impact of denial-of-Service attack announcements on the market value of firms. Risks Manage. Insurance Rev. 6 (2), 97–121.

**Marianna Lezzi** is a PhD candidate in Complex System Engineering at the University of Salento. Her research is about the management of cybersecurity risks within Industry 4.0 contexts. She has been involved in European research projects (such as PRACTICE andTOREADOR) basedonthedevelopment ofmodels for themanagement of Big Data belonging to aeronautical companies. She has experience in the definition of innovative business management methodologies and secure collaborative processes within the aeronautical supply chain.

**Mariangela Lazoi**, PhD, is Researcher at the Department of Innovation Engineering, University of Salento. She received the Ph.D. degree in eBusiness from the University of Salento, Lecce, in 2009. She is scientific responsible of national research projects about new technologies implementation in manufacturing and creative industries and is involved in European research projects about big-data management and product-service system implementation. She is responsible of the area Digital Engineering for Industry in the CORELab (Collaborative hOlistic Research Approach)in the University of Salento and collaborates with different companies addressing tecnoorganizational solutions. Her research interests are product design methods and tools, product lifecycle management, business process management and collaborative tools.

**Angelo Corallo** received the M.Sc. degree in physics from the University of Lecce, Lecce, Italy, in 1999. He is an Associated Professor with the Department of Innovation Engineering, University of Salento, Lecce, and is responsible of CORELab (Collaborative hOlistic Research Approach Laboratory) in the same University. His main research interests include technologies and organizational strategies in complex industries, knowledge management, and collaborative working environments in project and process-based organizations, with specific reference to the aerospace industry and languages, methodologies, and technologies for knowledge modelling. He is coordinator or scientific responsible of several research projects such as: X@Work, Open Philosophies for Associative Autopoietic Digital Ecosystems (OPAALS), Distributed Information Systems for Co-ordinated Service Oriented interoperability (DISCORSO), Multichannel Adaptive Information system (MAIS), Knowledge-based Innovation for the Web Infrastructure (KIWI), Towards Evolving Knowledge-based internetworked Enterprise (TEKNE) Extended Net-Lab (X-Net-Lab), Digital Business Ecosystem (DBE), Privacy-Preserving Computation in the Cloud (PRACTICE), Secure Supply Chain Management (SecureSCM), Collaborative & Robust Engineering using Simulation Capability Enabling Next Design Optimisation (CRESCENDO), and TrustwOrthy model-awaRE Analytics Data platfORm (TORE-ADOR).