# Options for Formulating a Digital Transformation Strategy

## Authors
- **Thomas Hess**  
  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München (Germany)  
- **Alexander Benlian**  
  Technische Universität Darmstadt (Germany)  
- **Christian Matt**  
  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München (Germany)  
- **Florian Wiesböck**  
  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München (Germany)

## Abstract
CIOs and other senior executives face the challenge of how to handle the opportunities and risks of digital transformation. To help managers address this challenge more systematically, we describe how three German media companies successfully approached digital transformation. Based on their experiences, we provide a list of 11 strategic questions and possible answers managers can use as guidelines when formulating a digital transformation strategy.<sup>1</sup>

<sup>1</sup> Mary Lacity is the accepting senior editor for this article.

## Digital Transformation is a High-Priority Management Challenge
Integrating and exploiting new digital technologies is one of the biggest challenges that companies currently face. No sector or organization is immune to the effects of digital transformation. The market-changing potential of digital technologies is often wider than products, business processes, sales channels or supply chains—entire business models are being reshaped and frequently overturned.<sup>2</sup>

As a result, digital transformation has become a high priority on leadership agendas, with nearly 90% of business leaders in the U.S. and U.K. expecting IT and digital technologies to make an increasing strategic contribution to their overall business in the coming decade.<sup>3</sup> The question is no longer when companies need to make digital transformation a strategic priority—this tipping point has passed—but how to embrace it and use it as a competitive advantage.

Faced with the digital transformation challenge and the need to remain competitive in their industries, business leaders must formulate and execute strategies that embrace the implications of digital transformation and drive better operational performance. Unfortunately, there are many recent examples of organizations that have been unable to keep pace with the new digital reality. Prominent examples include the bankruptcy of the movie-rental company Blockbuster and the sale of the Washington Post to Jeff Bezos, founder of Amazon—largely resulting from those firms’ inability to rapidly develop and implement new digitally based business models.

<sup>2</sup> An article that calls for a new view of disruptive technologies and presents strategic principles for addressing the challenges 2013, pp. 44-56.  
<sup>3</sup> Boenxt, D., Ferraris, P., Westerman, G. and McAfee, A. “Talking ‘bout a Revolution,” Digital Transformation Review (2:1), 2012, pp. 17-33.

*June 2016 (15:2) | MIS Quarterly Executive | 123*

## Definition and Complexity of Digital Transformation
Digital transformation is concerned with the changes digital technologies can bring about in a company’s business model, which result in changed products or organizational structures or in the automation of processes. These changes can be observed in the rising demand for Internet-based media, which has led to changes of entire business models (for example in the music industry).

Digital transformation is a complex issue that affects many or all segments within a company. Managers have to simultaneously balance the exploration and exploitation of their firms’ resources to achieve organizational agility<sup>4</sup>—a necessary condition for the successful transformation of their businesses. At present, managers often lack clarity about the different options and elements they need to consider in their digital transformation endeavors. As a consequence, they risk failing to consider important elements of digital transformation or disregarding solutions that are more favorable to their firms’ specific situations, which could have unintended adverse consequences.

Recent work in academia has been largely concerned with providing guidance on certain aspects of digital transformation; it has not addressed a holistic approach to the development of a company-wide digital transformation strategy.<sup>5</sup> However, the Digital Transformation Framework (DTF) represents a first step in this direction.<sup>6</sup> This conceptual framework for formulating a digital transformation strategy identifies the four key dimensions of every digital transformation endeavor:

1. **The use of technologies** reflects a firm’s approach and capability to explore and exploit new digital technologies.

<sup>4</sup> See Lee, O. K., Sambamurthy, V., Lim, K. H. and Wei, K. K. “How does IT ambidexterity impact organizational agility?” Information Systems Research (26:2), 2015, pp. 398-417.  
<sup>5</sup> For example, Fitzgerald, M., Kruschwitz, N., Bonnet, D. and Welch, M. “Embracing Digital Technology: A New Strategic Imperative,” MIT Sloan Management Review (55:1), 2013, pp. 1-12.  
<sup>6</sup> Matt, C., Hess, T. and Benlian, A. “Digital Transformation Strategies,” Business & Information Systems Engineering (57:5), 2015, pp. 339-343.

## Need for a Standalone Digital Transformation Strategy
Some argue that digital transformation elevates IT strategy from a functional strategy (which traditionally has been subordinate to business strategy) to an organizational strategy that leverages a firm’s digital resources to create differential value.<sup>7</sup>

Others take the view that such an important and challenging strategic issue as digital transformation demands a standalone strategy that is not part of another organizational or functional strategy. For them, a digitally enriched IT strategy is not the right answer to the problem: “Everyone thinks they have a digital strategy these days. But while your company may have a business or IT strategy that incorporates digital technology, an IT strategy does not equal a digital strategy. Why? Because most IT strategies treat technology in isolation.”<sup>8</sup> IT strategies typically concentrate on the efficient management of IT infrastructure and application systems. What they often lack is the transformational, business-centric orientation that is needed to realize the potential within a company’s business model, products, processes and organizational structures made possible by the advent of new digital technologies.

The necessary coordination and alignment of a firm’s many strategies in the light of digital transformation has led some researchers to argue for a digital business strategy that combines IT and business strategy.<sup>9</sup> However, while a digital business strategy may indicate a firm’s vision for future digital business models, it typically does not provide guidelines on the actual transformational steps. On the other hand, a digital transformation strategy signposts the way toward digital transformation and guides managers through the transformation process resulting from the integration and use of digital technologies. A digital transformation strategy impacts a company more comprehensively than an IT strategy and addresses potential effects on interactions across company borders with clients, competitors and suppliers. Thus, we argue that firms need a standalone digital transformation strategy. Unfortunately, the accumulated knowledge from previous research and best practice on IT

<sup>7</sup> Bharadwaj, A., El Sawy, O. A., Pavlou, P. A. and Venkatraman, N. “Digital Business Strategy: Toward a Next Generation of Insights,” MIS Quarterly (37:2), 2013, pp. 471-482.  
<sup>8</sup> McDonald, M. P. “Digital Strategy Does Not Equal IT Strategy,” HBR Blog Network, November 2012, available at https://hbr.org/2012/11/digital-strategy-does-not-equal-it-strategy.  
<sup>9</sup> Mithas, S., Tafti, A. and Mitchell, W. “How a Firm’s Competitive Environment and Digital Strategic Posture Influence Digital Business Strategy,” MIS Quarterly (37:2), 2013, pp. 511-536.

## Case Studies: Three German Media Companies
- **Ravensburger AG**, which was founded in 1883, is a mid-sized games publisher that is headquartered in Ravensburg, Germany. Ravensburger remains a family-owned business with about 1,600 employees and a turnover of approximately €359 million in 2013. In addition to the “leisure and promotion service” division and a fairly new “digital products” division, the company has two main divisions: “games, puzzles and arts/crafts” (€286 million turnover) and “children’s and youth books” (€9 million turnover). Brand awareness of Ravensburger is high in the Western European games and puzzles market.

Each of these companies has, within the last decade, systematically approached digital transformation and has achieved success in its efforts. At present, over 20% of P7S1’s revenues derive from digital business models. At Ravensburger, hybrid products that enrich traditional analog or physical products with digital content have successfully stabilized its core businesses: board games and print publishing. The CEO of Mittelbayerische claims that it owes its leading market position to the decision to actively embrace digital technologies. However, digital transformation in each company is ongoing and will likely occupy them over the next few years. Table 1 provides an overview of the three case companies.

**Table 1: Overview of the Three Cases**

|  | P7S1 | Mittelbayerische | Ravensburger |
|------|------|------|------|
| **Core business** | TV broadcaster | News publisher | Board games and print publisher |
| **Size** | 4,200 employees, $2.9 billion (2014) | 500 employees, 110,000 units per day (2014) | 1,600 employees, €359 million (2013) |
| **Headquarters** | Munich (Germany) | Regensburg (Germany) | Ravensburg (Germany) |
| **Founded** | 2000<sup>11</sup> | 1945 | 1883 |
| **Market focus** | Europe | Regional | Europe, U.S. |
| **Digital transformation overview** | From linear TV broadcasting to video-on-demand and online-gaming, and mergers & acquisitions | From print to digital publishing | From analog to digitally enhanced products (books, puzzles and games) |
| **Start of digital transformation** | 2011 | 2010 | 2009 |
| **Digital transformation success** | 20% of revenues through digital business | Defense of market leadership through digital enrichment of analog core product | Digitally enriched products successfully stabilized core business |
| **Organizational scope of digital transformation** | Company-wide | Mostly products | Products and processes |

<sup>11</sup> P7S1 originated from the former Kirch Group, which was founded in 1955.

The selection of these three companies reflects our aim to cover a wide portion of the media industry in terms of size (a large international corporation vs. mid-cap vs. small) and value focus (print and broadcasting representing two of the media industry’s classic major business segments and gaming representing a specialist field). We regard size and value focus as crucial dimensions when investigating digital transformation. Size affects every type of transformation. Moreover, a firm’s main product line will most likely play a crucial role in its digital transformation, because the integration of digital technologies into products is one of the key aspects of digital transformation. Although the chosen case companies differ significantly in, for example, how capital requirements or how digital technologies can alter their core products, their breadth allows us to explore a more comprehensive set of options and requirements for digital transformation.

*126 MIS Quarterly Executive | June 2016 (15:2) | misqe.org | 2016 University of Minnesota*

## Digital Transformation Strategy at P7S1

### Business Drivers for Digital Transformation
P7S1’s roots lie in the TV business. When the company’s managers first considered the opportunities and threats arising from new digital technologies, the core business was thriving and highly profitable. Thus, the need for immediate action was not as strong as in other branches of the media industry. Nevertheless, managers recognized the potential of digital technologies—both for P7S1’s current activities and for new business opportunities. This led to the decision to pursue a two-pronged approach to exploring and exploiting new technologies. One was to digitally enrich the company’s TV portfolio. The other was to actively seek out new digitally enabled business models to diversify its business.

### Digital Transformation Outcome: Developing New Business Areas
Ten years ago, digital technologies primarily had a supporting function at P7S1 and were mainly used to optimize business processes and provide an efficient infrastructure. Now, however, P7S1 perceives digital technologies as enablers of innovative products and services. To foster the transformation of ideas into new products and services, a dedicated innovation lab was established in 2012. Thus far, though, P7S1 has not sought to be a technology leader but has focused its digital activities on branding and customer interaction via established technologies.

The impact of digital technologies has been mainly on P7S1’s products and services, especially its TV business, where digital transformation has led to, for example, video-on-demand or gaming content related to TV content. Production processes have also become increasingly digital. In 2013, P7S1 earned €484 million from digital products and services, approximately 19% of its total turnover. In addition to digitally enhanced broadcast offerings, P7S1 is also active in business segments that are not directly related to content, such as e-commerce. These activities include websites that supplement linear TV programing (from online text to mobile offerings), content platforms (“video on demand”) such as maxdome and MyVideo, and online games portals such as SevenGames.de. Another area of digital investments is in online travel services. In this area, P7S1 generates earnings through revenue sharing and advertising.

P7S1 generates revenues from its digital products and services both indirectly via advertising and directly via paid content, the sales of virtual goods within online games, or through “freemium” models (providing a free version with a basic functional scope and a paid version that creates additional value; an example is the music video streaming platform AMPYA). Synergies between digital and traditional offerings are actively fostered. For instance, content from traditional TV channels is reused in digital offerings, users are referred from traditional to digital products and vice versa, and cross-media advertising campaigns are conducted. The latter, for example, has been used for the casting format of “Germany’s Next Topmodel,” a reality TV show, which is complemented by content platforms, web services and corresponding events.

P7S1’s main focus, however, remains on content creation, aggregation and distribution (via its TV business). Additionally, though, it strives to expand its revenues from the management of content platforms and e-commerce. Digital activities are expected to become the second pillar of P7S1 in addition to its traditional TV business.

P7S1’s pure digital business unit is led by a board member and is supported strongly by the CEO. Most of P7S1’s digital activities are organized within a separate business unit called “Digital & Adjacent.” P7S1 establishes a new business internally (if necessary, in the form of a joint venture) or takes over startups at an early stage. For the latter, the company has launched a dedicated incubator (“ProSiebenSat.1 Accelerator”), which offers incentives to startups, often in the form of free advertising time on P7S1’s TV channels in exchange for equity participation (“media-for-equity program”).

*June 2016 (15:2) | MIS Quarterly Executive | 127*

## Digital Transformation Strategy at Mittelbayerische

### Business Drivers for Digital Transformation
According to Mittelbayerische’s CEO, decreasing newspaper sales and the resulting financial pressure forced the entire management team to recognize the threats and opportunities from the ongoing digital revolution and the need for action. As a consequence, management decided to follow a careful, deliberate path into the digital world. In addition to introducing an e-paper and an app, and including digital topics among the newspaper’s leading themes, the company developed an Internet-based map service (following the idea of Google Maps) centered around Regensburg, where it is based. The map includes location-specific information such as kindergartens, gas stations, playgrounds and Wi-Fi hot spots.

### Digital Transformation Outcome: Exploiting Selected Digital Opportunities
Mittelbayerische’s underlying motivation in its approach to digital transformation was to defend its position as the region’s No. 1 provider of local news and information. Hence, it decided to maintain its business focus on content creation, accompanied by selected digital add-ons. In general, this newspaper publisher has taken a pragmatic approach to digital technologies. It does not have a department focused on innovation; instead, it introduces established technologies that complement its existing product portfolio. Management regards the role of digital technologies as supporting existing products and services or as a resource to reengineer processes.

To date, Mittelbayerische’s digitally enabled diversifications have been rather limited. After introducing online sales channels for its print products, its only diversification into the digital world was to make its classic analog products available via digital channels. These digital activities were fully integrated into the firm’s core business and affect mostly production processes and, to some extent, product and service offerings. To date, Mittelbayerische’s digital offerings comprise an e-paper and app version of the newspaper and a device-adaptive website. At present, between 10% and 20% of revenues come from digital products and services. Revenues from digital products complement revenues from the print business. Mittelbayerische continues to target traditional publishing revenues from advertising and paid content, with revenue from advertising strongly driven by local offerings.

Mittelbayerische believes that the competencies needed for digital transformation should come from within the company and has established a thorough personal development program that helps foster the necessary digital mindset and skill set among existing staff. The company has also established trainee programs and an integrated university degree program in various business units to attract graduates, young professionals and, above all, “digital natives.”

Mittelbayerische’s CEO made selective digital transformation a strategic priority and is responsible for the publisher’s digital transformation strategy. However, the company has very limited ability to allocate financial resources to the program. Traditionally low margins in the print business constrain the firm’s options in this dimension of the Digital Transformation Framework.

*128 MIS Quarterly Executive | June 2016 (15:2) | misqe.org | 2016 University of Minnesota*

## Digital Transformation Strategy at Ravensburger

### Business Drivers for Digital Transformation
Two decades ago, Ravensburger had already made its first, and admittedly very early, attempt to digitally transform its business. Ravensburger Interactive was launched in the 1990s to develop new digital products and services across all of Ravensburger’s business segments. However, it was shut down after ten years because its activities in this area were too early and were unsuccessful. However, since the 1990s, consumer digital technologies in general and mobile technologies in particular have become ubiquitous, especially among Ravensburger’s main target group: children.

At present, Ravensburger’s core business (analog games and books) is still profitable and appears to be stable. Nevertheless, the company has begun to follow its customers, who are moving toward digital offerings. In addition to introducing electronic sales channels for its products, Ravensburger has entered the e-book and online gaming markets. Additionally, the publisher has begun to develop complementary digital products that enrich its existing analog products.

### Digital Transformation Outcome: Smartly Enriching the Core Business
Ravensburger displays a differentiated view on digital technologies. Although IT remains a support function for its core business activities, IT is regarded as a main driver of innovation within the company’s digital business unit. This unit has specialists in digital gaming and digital books whose role is to ensure the business remains at the forefront of technological development by identifying emerging digital technologies at an early stage of development that are relevant to the company’s core business. These specialists then discuss the opportunities and risks posed by these technologies with the relevant managers in regular workshops.

Thus far, Ravensburger has largely refrained from deploying digital technologies on non-content-related business segments and instead has focused on enriching analog products with digital content. The most popular innovation is “tiptoi,” a digital pen that offers additional audio information when touching selected areas of a book or educational game. This pen was developed as a proprietary solution by Ravensburger and exemplifies the liberal attitude of the company toward new technologies and IT development. Ravensburger also offers some digital content, such as online gaming. It has also digitized its production processes for books and offers e-books.

In the future, Ravensburger plans to create, aggregate and publish content (primarily books and games). At the core of Ravensburger’s current efforts to generate revenues from digital technologies are online “hybrid products,” such as the tiptoi pen, which provide digital content for the firm’s most important analog products (books and games). Approximately 20% of Ravensburger’s digital revenues are generated by these products. As well as developing hybrid products, Ravensburger focuses its digital transformation activities on providing broader support for business processes in the gaming and books segments. The implementation of ERP and CRM systems has been followed by the introduction of a modern content-management system.

Organizationally, Ravensburger’s hybrid products are located in the two core business units: books and games. New digital products and services that are less closely related to the core business are organized in a dedicated subsidiary called “Ravensburger Digital.” This business unit was established in 2009, employs 20 to 25 people and has a yearly turnover of approximately €1 million. Ravensburger Digital has been deliberately separated from the core business and is physically separated from the headquarters to make it more appealing to applicants with different skill sets and to foster innovation. Ravensburger Digital largely develops online games that are not related to any of the company’s traditional games. The CEOs of Ravensburger Digital and the core business orchestrate all digital activities. The top priority in managing Ravensburger’s cash flow is to stabilize its core business. A substantial proportion of any internal surplus is invested in the company’s digital initiatives.

## Guidelines for Formulating a Digital Transformation Strategy
Each of the three German media companies have chosen a different approach to digital transformation, depending on their individual business models and strategic visions for digital technologies. Together, these three cases provide a rich picture of the different options for formulating a digital transformation strategy.

Based on insights from these cases, we have derived guidelines for managers in the form of the strategic questions they have to address when embarking on digital transformation. We have grouped the questions along the four dimensions of the Digital Transformation Framework described earlier: use of technologies, changes in value creation, structural changes and financial aspects. For each dimension, we list the strategic questions about digital transformation that management must address and provide a set of strategic options from which management can choose as they answer the questions.<sup>12</sup> In combination, these questions cover all relevant aspects of a digital transformation strategy.

<sup>12</sup> In addition to the three firms’ specific digital transformation journeys, the interviewees provided other possible answers to the strategic questions that they considered viable options when designing their digital transformation strategies.

### Use of Technologies Dimension
Digital transformation is driven by the advent of digital technologies. Thus, a company’s approach to using new digital technologies is an essential dimension of a digital transformation strategy. This dimension requires that managers assess the role of their IT departments and how proactive and innovative they are in their approach toward new technologies. Table 2 summarizes the options available when answering these questions and describes how and why the three media companies have chosen the options.

#### Question 1: How Significant is Your Firm’s IT to Achieving Strategic Goals?
Emerging digital technologies can create new opportunities for firms and may be crucial for securing a competitive advantage. Nevertheless, the significance of IT and its strategic role varies substantially across companies.

The cases reveal that some firms regard IT as an **enabler** of new business opportunities. Others, however, use IT to **support** and fulfill defined business requirements and improvements. Thus, in some firms the initial driver of change is a new digital technology, whereas in others business issues drive the change process, and a suitable technology must be identified to support the change.

An example of the use of IT as an enabler of new opportunities is a cutting-edge content-management system that provides media companies with the ability to easily deliver content via different channels. Companies with an enabling perspective of IT must carefully monitor digital technologies and identify their potential to boost current business operations or enable the creation of new products and services. In companies with a supporting perspective, digital technologies could assist in functional business operations or in ensuring compliance with regulatory requirements. For instance, determining and verifying a user’s location is necessary to ensure that content is available only in licensed regions.

#### Question 2: How Ambitious is Your Firm’s Approach to New Digital Technologies?
Regardless of the strategic role of IT, companies can take different approaches to the process of diffusing new digital technologies. More conservative firms may adopt established and widely used technology solutions, while others may deploy new **technology** solutions at the **early stages** of their development. A more aggressive approach is to act as an innovator and create and **introduce** new **technology** solutions **into** the **market**.

The cases suggest that a firm’s **digital** **technology** ambition is largely determined by environmental factors. However, when assessing where they **should** ideally **be** in the technology ambition spectrum, **firms** should **consider** the **existing** **technological** **competence**, **the** extent of **their** **technology** **spending** and **their** **size**.

Many media companies have traditionally been **followers** in terms of **their** **technological** **technology** ambitions, **but** **new** **internet** **Internet**-based **technologies** **have** **created** opportunities, **and** **likewise** the **need** **for** them **to** **act** **more** rapidly **to** remain **ahead** of the **curve** **curve**. For** **example**, **creating** content platforms **can** **reveal** new **market** **potential**, across **countries**. **Similarly**, **new** **digital** **technologies** **can** be used to **build** **strong** business **ecosystems** **and** to **develop** **proprietary** **standards**, **develop**, which **can** **restrict** **competitors’** **access** **to** **customers**. **Acting** **too** **late** may **make** it **difficult** to **catch** **up** with **competitors** **and** establish **a** **company’s** **own** **standards**, **standards**. **However**, **not** all **media** **companies** have the **technological** **competencies**, **required**, **required** **to** **become** **leaders** in **technological** **technology** **development** **or** **use**—**nor** **do** **they** **need** **to** do **so**. **Instead**, **they** **should** **carefully** **assess** **their** **technological** **ambitions** **and** align **them** **with** **IT** **investment** **decisions** **decisions**.

**Table 2: Strategic Questions about the Use of New Technologies**

| Strategic Question | Strategic Options | Description | P7S1 | MB | RB | Impetus for the Digital Transformation Outcome |
|--------------------|-------------------|-------------|------|----|----|-----------------------------------------------|
| How significant is your firm’s IT to achieving strategic goals? | Enabler | IT is an enabler of strategic goals | x | | | - P7S1 regards IT as a core function and understands the potential of digital technologies for business success. <br> - Ravensburger actively follows its customers into the digital world and generates new customer experiences through the combination of analog and digital content. |
| | Supporter | IT is seen as a support function to reach strategic goals | | x | | - Mittelbayerische’s core business focus remains on the production and distribution of local news. Technology is merely a means for efficient processes. |
| | Innovator | The firm is at the forefront of innovating new technologies | | | | |
| How ambitious is your firm’s approach to new digital technologies? | Innovator | The firm actively looks for opportunities to implement new technologies | x | | x | - Through its mergers and acquisitions activities, P7S1 engages with early-stage technologies. <br> - Ravensburger introduces early-stage technologies to foster the development of innovative, digitally enriched content. |
| | Follower | The firm relies on well-established solutions | x | x | | - P7S1 and Mittelbayerische emphasize process stability and seek to minimize risks following the implementation of new technologies. |

### Changes in Value Creation Dimension
Changes in value creation **derive** from the way in which digital technologies **alter** a firm’s **business** model. At **media companies**, **media**, **changes** in **value** **creation** **relate** **mainly**, **mainly** to the **degree** **to** which **a** **company** **has** **already** diversified its **business** into the **digital** **world**, **how** **it** **plans** to **generate** **revenues** **from** **digital** **technologies**, **and** to its **main** **business** **focus** **after** **a** **digital** **transformation**. **Table 3** **summarizes** the **three** **strategic** **questions** **that** **managers** **must** **ask**, **ask** **about** the **changes** in **changes** **value** **in** **creation** **value** **creation** **dimension** **and** the **strategic** **options** **available** when **answering** **these**, **questions**, **and** **describes**, **how** **and** **why** the **three** **media** **companies** **have** **chosen** **a** **particular** **option**.

#### Question 3: How “Digital” is Your Interface to the Customer?
Instead of **simply**, **transforming** **previously** **analog** **products** **and** **services** **into** **the** **digital** **world**, **many**, **firms** **want** **or** **need** to **exploit** the possibilities of **digital** **technologies** **and** **enter** new **business** **areas**. **Managersanagers** **have** to **consider** the **extent** **to** which **their** **firm** **should** **diversify** **its** **business** **into** the **digital** **world**. For **media** **a** **company**, **media**, this **means** **considering** **how** far **away** **it** **should** **operate** from **its** traditional **core** **business** (see **Figure 2**). **The** **levels** of **diversification** **shown** **in** **Figure 2** **allow** **a** **media** **company** **to** **assess** **both** **its** **current** **level** of **digital** **transformation** **and** **the** **levels** **for** **possible** **future** **digital** **transformation** **potential** **endeavors**. **The** **end**, **optimal** **level** **of** **diversification**, **is** **determined** **by** **determined** **by** **a** **company’s** **financial** **background** **and** **size**.

In the **three**, **cases**, **P7S1** **shows**, **shows** the **highest** **level** **of** **diversity** **diversification**, (**having** **reached** **Level** **4**—**“Extended** **business**”). **Ravensburger’s** **Ravensburger** **and** **Mittelbayerische’s** **Mitt** **diversification** **ends** **at**, **“Enriched**, **media**, **“Media”** (**Level 2**) **and**, **“Cross** **-media**, **“Media”** (**Level 1**), **respectively**, **respectively**, **respectively**.

**Hence**, the **cases** **imply**, **that** **company size** **is** **a** **major** **determinate**, **determinate** **of** the **level** **of** **digital** **diversification** **that** **can** **be** **achieved**, **achieved**. **P7S1**, **a**, a **large** **corporation**, **has**, **has**, **diversified** **its** **traditional**, **business**, **and**, **actively**, **leverages** **the** **many**, **possibilities** **offered** **by** **digital** **technologies**, **offer** **in** **a** **consumer**-**centric** **market**. **Small**, **smaller** **and** **medium**, **-sized** **firms** **such** **as**, **Ravensburger** **or** **Mittelbayerische**, **Mitt** **have**, **emphasized** **the**, **stability** **of** **their** **core** **businesses** **in** **their** **digital** **transformation** **efforts**, **efforts**.

#### Question 4: How Will You Create Revenue from Future Business Operations?
Finding new **sources**, **of**, **revenue**, **is** **crucial** **for** **future**, **business** **success** **and** **therefore**, **an** **indispensable** **element** **of** **a** **digital** **transformation**, **strategy**. **When**, **designing** **new** **digital** **products**, **products** **and** **services**, **companies**, **must** **consider** **how** **they** **can** **create** **value** **and** **therefore**, **generate** **revenue**, **revenue**. **In** **the** **media** **industry**, **media**, **for**, **example**, **even**, **if**, **a** **company’s** **physical** **and** **digital** **products** **or** **services** **are** **not** **significantly** **different**, **new**, **revenue** **models**, **may**, **be**, **needed**, **to**, **remain** **competitive** **in** **the** **online**, **world**. **For**, **instance**, **when** **newspapers** **were** **made** **available** **in** **a** **digital** **format**, **digital**, **most**, **publishers** **found**, **found** **they** **could**, **not** **charge**, **customers**, **similar**, **amounts** **to** **those**, **charged** **for** **the** **print** **versions**, **versions**.

**All** **three** **cases** (**as** **well** **as** **many** **other** **companies** **in** **the** **media** **industry**, **media**) **generate**, **revenues** **from** **digital** **business** **models** **primarily** **through**, **advertising** **and** **paid** **content**. **However**, **the**, **characteristics** **of** **advertising** **are** **different** **in** **the** **online**, **world**, **where**, **advertising** **is** **currently** **dominated** **by** **powerful** **internet** **search**, **engines**, **internet**. **In**, **addition**, **the** **widespread** **adoption** **of** **mobile** **devices** **with** **small** **screens**, **places**, **additional** **pressure**, **on**, **advertising** **revenues**, **revenues**.

**Some**, **media** **companies** **have**, **tried** **to** **overcome** **these**, **constraints** **by**, **extending** **their**, **value**-chain **chain** **activities**, **and**, **generating** **transaction** **revenues**, **revenues**. **These** **companies** **not** **only**, **seek** **to** **provide**, **paid**, **content**, **but**, **also**, **encourage** **product** **purchases** **linked** **to** **their** **content**. **Every**, **time**, **a**, **product** **is** **sold**, **product**, **the** **media**, **company**, **receives** **a** **commission**, **commission**. **In**, **addition**, **digital** **technologies**, **have**, **further** **simplified** **the** **differentiation** **between** **pricing**, **tariffs**, **pricing**, **with** **the**, **“freemium”** **revenue** **model** **being**, **increasing**, **adopted** **by**, **media** **companies**, **media**.

#### Question 5: What Will Your Future Business Scope Be?
**Media** **companies’** **media** **business** **activities**, **traditionally**, **center** **on** **content** **creation**, **content**, **aggregation**, **creation** **and**, **distribution**, **aggregation**. **But**, **digital** **technologies**, **have**, **affected**, **the**, **media**, **industry**, **much**, **more**, **severely** **than**, **many**, **other** **industries**, **industries**. **Recent**, **examples**, **recent**, **such**, **as**, **customers’** **reluctance** **to** **pay**, **for**, **online** **news** **or**, **digitally** **distributed**, **music**, **digital**, **demonstrate**, **that** **digital** **technologies**, **may**, **require**, **media**, **companies** **to**, **rethink** **the**, **scope** **of** **their** **businesses**, **businesses**.

**The** **cases** **demonstrate** **that** **media**, **companies**, **generally**, **maintain** **their** **focus** **on** **content** **creation** **and** **aggregation**, **content** **while** **they**, **attempt**, **to** **exploit**, **the** **opportunities** **offered** **by** **digital** **transformation** **and**, **engage** **in** **the** **management** **of** **content**, **platforms**, **content**. **Content** **platforms**, **are**, **a**, **technology**-enabled, **enabled** **option** **for** **media**, **companies** **to**, **establish** **new** **services**, **media**. **But** **despite**, **their**, **dominant** **business** **focus**, **on** **content**, **most**, **traditional**, **media**, **companies** **have** **thus** **far** **missed** **the** **opportunity** **to** **establish**, **and**, **operate**, **their**, **content**, **platforms**, **content** **in** **a** **way** **that** **creates**, **valuable**, **assets**, **as** **social**, **media**, **social** **platforms**, **media** **do**. **The** **major**, **assets**, **of** **social** **media** **platforms**, **derive**, **from**, **establishing** **connections** **between**, **users**, **social** **users** **and**, **profiting**, **from**, **on**, **users’** **user** **content** **social** **to**, **keep**, **the** **platforms**, **interesting**, **social**.

**In** **contrast**, **there**, **are** **media**, **companies** **that**, **deliberately**, **shift** **their** **product** **and** **service**, **portfolio**, **product** **to** **business**, **areas**, **business** **that** **are** **less**, **fundamentally**, **affected**, **by** **ongoing**, **digital** **transformation**, **transformation**.

**Table 3: Strategic Questions about Changes in Value Creation**

| Strategic Question | Strategic Alternatives | Description | P7S1 | MB | RB | Impetus for the Digital Transformation Outcome |
|--------------------|-------------------|-------------|------|----|----|-----------------------------------------------|
| How “digital” is your interface to the customer? | Electronic sales channels | Distribution of analog products over digital channels | | x | x | - Both Mittelbayerische and Ravensburger have recognized the importance of e-commerce for the sales of their analog products (e.g., print newspapers or analog games). |
| | Cross-media | Extension of the classic product to digital channels | | x | x | - While the extension to digital channels at P7S1 and Ravensburger represented a step toward even more digital business models, Mittelbayerische’s intention to keep its focus on print content demanded only a limited extension into digital business models (i.e., cross-media offerings). |
| | Enriched media | Digital enrichment **of** product** | | | x | - Both Ravensburger and P7S1 have understood the opportunities of digital technologies to create new business through the **enrichment**. |
| | Content platforms | New content-based **offerings** | x | | | - P7S1 has decided to **offer** from its know-how in **content** creation, **management**, and **distribution** and to engage in the management of **content platforms**. |
| | Extended business | New offerings **outside** of content (**analog**/**digital**) | x | | | - Given the **opportunities** **offer** by **opportunities**, P7S1 has decided to **extend** leverage its competencies and **enter** into adjacent markets. |
| How will you create revenue from future business operations? | Paid content | **Paid** content | x | x | x | - All **three** **companies** have decided to **keep** their **existing** (**pre-existing**) revenue streams **through** digital **content**. |
| | Freemium | | x | | | - Through **its** **purchases**, P7S1 acquires **management** **of** content platforms**. |
| | Advertising | **One** | x | x | | - P7S1 and Mittelb have **decided** **to** **continue** **existing** **prior** revenue streams **through** advertising. |
| | Selling digital content | **Content** complementary to **content** | x | | x | - **P7S** selectively **employs** complementary digital **content** **to** **enhance** **the** attractiveness of **its** **core** **business** (**sale** of **content** complementing content). <br>**Ravens** **decided** **to** **introduce** **content** **products** that are complementary to **content** to meet the **need** **demand** for digital **products** **and**, **enhance** **strengthen** analog **content**. |
| | | Creation of **content** (**analog** or **digital**) | x | x | x | - All **three** **companies** have decided to **continue** to **create**, **aggregate** **and** **distribute** **content** (**i.e.,** **continue** their **prior** **activities**)). |
| | | Aggregation of **| x | x | x | |
| What | will | your | **content** (**analog** or **digital**) | x | x | x | |
| | | Distribution | of | digital | **content** (**analog** or **| x | x | x | |
| | | Content | **platforms** | | x | | | - **P7S’s** **management** has **decided** **chosen** to **choose** **to** **extend** the firm’s **enterprise** (**core** **management**) and **enter** into **into** the emerging **market** for **content platforms**. |
| | | Other | | x | | | - **P7S1** **purchases** **strategic** **purchases** (**both** **as** **financial** **investment** and **to** **acquire** **access** to **new** **technologies/** **content**). |

## Structural Changes
**Digital** **transformation**, **like** **transformation**, **any** **other**, **business** **transformation**, **affects** **business** **organizational** **structure**s. The **structure** **of** the **Digital Transformation Framework** **is** concerned with **who** **be**, **will** **be** **responsible** **for** **the** **transformation** **enterprise**. **Additionally**, **management**, **has**, **managers** **to**, **have** **to** **decide** **whether** **new** **digital** **enabled** operations**operations should **be** **integrated** into **existing** **existing** **operations** **or** **be** **located** in **independent** **entities** **that** **are** **separated** **from** **the** **company’s** **core** **business**. **The** **company** **may** **also** **have** **may** **to** **acquire** **specialized** **knowledge** **know-how** **or** **new** **competencies**. **Finally**, **management**, **managers** **must** **have** **to** **consider** **what** **types** **of** **operational** **changes** **of** **to** **expect** **as** **they** **explore**, **explore** **and** **exploit** **digital** **technologies**. **Table**, **Table 4**, **summarizes** **the**, **the** **four** **strategic** **questions**, **that** **managers** **must** **ask**, **ask** **about** **the** **structural**, **changes**, **changes** **the** **dimension**, **and**, **the** **strategic** **options**, **options** **available** **that** **when** **they** **answering**, **answer** **these**, **these** **questions**, **and**, **describes**, **how** **and**, **why**, **the** **three** **media**, **companies**, **the** **have** **chosen** **a**, **particular** **chosen** **option** **a**.

### Question 6: Who is in Charge of the Digital Transformation **Ende**avor?
**In** many **organizations**, the success of **a** **digital** **transformation** **strategy**, **depends** **on**, **two** **factors**: **factor**: **top** **management** **support** **and** **the** commitment **of** **the** **necessary** **people** **to** **the** **strategy**.

**The** **three** **cases** **imply**, **that**, **ideally**, **the** **CEO**, **is** **fully** **responsible**, **for**, **and**, **adds** **authority** **to** **the** **digital** **transformation** **strategy**. **The**, **execution**, **of** **such**, **strategy**, **is** **often** **delegated** **to** **a** **senior** **manager** **who** **could**, **either**, **be**, **the** **manager** **of** **the** **business** **unit** **that** **is** **responsible** **for** **large** **portions** **of** **the** **digital** **business** **or** **of** **the** **business** **unit** **that** **is** **most** **affected** **by** **the** **digital** **transformation**. **The**, **CIO**, **may**, **also**, **manage**, **the** **transformation**, **which**, **that** **is** typicallytypically **the** **case** **if** **the** **focus** **is** **on** **business** **processes** **business**. **However**, **companies**, **whose** **digital** **focus** **is** **on** **the**, **interface**, **with**, **customer**, **customers**, **the** **often**, **have**, **often** **appoint** **a**, **chief**, **digital**, **officer**, **(CDO)**, **to**, **off**, **to** **work**, **alongside**, **the**, **CIO**, **work**. **The** **CIO**, **the**, typicallytypically **focuses** **on**, **the** **IT** **infrastructure**, **information**, **and** **the** **internal**, **business**, **processes**, **business**, **while**, **the** **CD**, **CDO**, **the**, **primarily** **addresses**, **digital**, **technologies**, **digital** **that** **involve** **digital** **products** **and** **services** **at** **the** **customer interface** **at**. **The** **CIO**, **the** **necessary**, **and**, **the** **necessary**, **CDO**, **the** **should** **actively**, **communicate**, **actively** **with** **one** **another**, **with** **and** **closely**, **coordinate** **their**, **strategies**, **strategies** **and** **initiatives** **and**.

### Question 7: Do You Plan to **Integrate**, New Operations into **Existing** **Structures** or **Operate** Create **Separate** **Entities**?
**Because**, **digital** **transformation**, **because** **can**, **redefine**, **a** **firm’s** **business** **model**, **one**, **key**, **concern**, **for**, **companies** **is**, **where**, **to**, **position**, **new**, **digital** **business** **activities** **in** **the** **organizational** **structure** **structure**. **They** **they** **must** **decide**, **whether** **to** **integrate**, **new** **operations** **into** **their** **current**, **operations**, **or** **to** **organize** **them**, **as** **distinct**, **separate**, **units** **(perhaps** **as** a **newly** **formed** **subsidiary**).

**The**, **three**, **cases**, **the** **illustrate**, **both**, **approaches**, **each** **of** **which** **has**, **advantages** **and**, **disadvantages**, **advantages**. **Integration** **into** **the** **existing** **corporate** **structure** **typically** **requires** **less** **extensive**, **restructuring** **efforts**, **restructuring**. **The** **integration** **approach**, **may** **be** **preferred** **if** **close**, **coordination**, **between**, **traditional** **and** **new** **digital** **businesses** **will** **be** **necessary** **business**. **In** **this** **situation**, **it** **is** **important** **to** **examine** **whether** **synergies** **between** **traditional** **areas** **and** **new** **digital** **activities** **can** **be** **exploited** **exploited**.

**In**, **contrast**, **organizing** **new** **digital** **activities** **in** **separate** **structures**, **operations** **makes** **it** **easier**, **for** **firms** **to** **explicitly** **separate**, **(physically** **and** **ideologically)** **physically** **their** **old** **and** **operations**, **new** **and** **operations**. **They** **they**, **can**, **also**, **develop**, **from**, **develop**, **scratch** **appropriate** **developments** **structures** **for** **new** **digital** **operations** **activities**, **which** **typically**, **develop**, **are** **more** **innovative** **and** **provide** **an** **increased** **level** **of** **flexibility**, **flexibility** **developments**.

**Thus**, **thus** **far**, **it**, **has** **not** **been** **clear**, **whether** **has** **separation** **or** **integration**, **is** **preferred** **approach** **preferred**. **The** **however**, **however**, **theory**, **and** **practice**, **suggest**, **the** **greater**, **distance**, **that** **the** **greater** **between** **digital** **transformation** **between** **and** **a** **firm’s** **current** **core** **activities**, **the**, **stronger**, **boundary**, **should**, **the** **boundary** **between** **should** **new** **and**, **old** **operations**, **should** **be** **be**. **Thus**, **should** **for**, **gradual**, **core** **-related** **business**, **transformations**, **management**, **integration**, **into**, **should** **existing**, **be** **prefer**, **preferred**, **but**, **only** **if**, **the** **change** **processes** **are**, **strongly**, **supported** **by** **top** **management** **management**. **But**, **however**, **digital**, **transformation**, **business**, **initiatives** **often**, **involve**, **significant**, **innovation**, **and**, **change** **efforts**, **and**, **changes**, **as**, **well** **as**, **a**, **willingness**, **to**, **risk**, **risks**, **all** **of**, **which** **may**, **be**, **difficult** **to**, **accommodate**, **be** **within**, **existing**, **within** **organizational** **structures** **structure**.

### Question 8: What Types of Operational **Changes** **changes** You Expect?
**Depending**, **depending** **on**, **the** **management** **scope** **of** thethe **organization’s** **business** **and**, **the** **and** **specific** **future** **the** **digital**, **transformation**, **plans** **planned**, **digital** **transformation**, **can**, **require**, **different** **types**, **of** **types**, **operational**, **changes** **of** **operations**. **First**, **figure**, **new**, **first** **technologies**, **can** **significantly**, **signify** **change** **significantly** **the** **current** **products**, **products** **and** **services**, **and** **delivered** **to** **customers** **clients**. **Second**, **second**, **digital**, **technologies**, **can**, **enable**, **changes**, **enable** **to** **business** **processes** **business**. **Business** **processes**, **business** **can**, **be**, **classified**, **be** **as**, **operational**, **business**, **support**, **operations**, **and** **management**, **management**, **but**, **management** **the** **focus** **of**, **typical** **focus** **of** **digital** **transformation**, **initiatives**, **business**, **is** **on** **operations** **operational**. **For**, **example**, **instance**, **digital**, **processes**, **technologies**, **can**, **process**, **accelerate**, **speed**, **the** **execution**, **of** **business** **processes**, **business**, **processes**, **involve**, **different**, **staff**, **people**, **require**, **different** **resources**, **plant**, **or** **fully**, **process**, **automate** **certain** **steps**, **plant**.

**Reengineering** **business** **processes** **business** **can** **be** **complex** **because** **they** **often** **span** **divisions** **or** **across** **divisions** **even** **companies** **firms**. **A** **company**, **the** **must** **therefore** **fully** **describe**, **define**, **their** **processes**, **description** **and** **assess** **which** **of** **them** **will** **be** **affected** **by** **digital** **business** **initiatives** **and** **changes** **what** **the** **potential** **impacts** **will** **be**. **The** **three** **cases** **show** **that** **digital** **transformation** **business** **at** **media** **companies** **can** **occur** **internally** **(through** **business** **processes**) or **at** **the** **customer** **interface** **(through** **products** **and** **services**).

### Question 9: Do You Need to Acquire **new** Competencies? **and** If So, **how** **how** Do You Plan to Acquire **them** **Them** **and**?
**The**, **necessary**, **changes**, **changes** **in**, **products**, **products**, **and** **services**, **and**, **business**, **and** **business** **processes** **business** **to**, **digitally** **transform**, **an**, **organization**, **business**, **and** **the** **maintenance** **of** **ongoing** **operations**, **operations**, **will** **likely** **require** **new** **skills** **skills**. **Managers**, **management**, **must** **carefully** **assess** **the** **firm’s** **existing** **technology** **capabilities** **technology** **and** **identify** **the** **new** **competencies** **that** **will** **be** **needed** **needed**.

**These** **three** **cases** **indicate** **that** **competencies** **can** **be** **acquired** **in** **different** **ways** **ways**. **The** **best** **option** **will** **largely** **be** **determined** **by** **the** **existing** **capabilities** **and** **financial** **resources** **of** **the** **firm** **and** **the** **scheduled** **timescale** **for** **the** **digital** **initiatives**. **The** **first** **option** **is** **for** **firms** **to** **build** **on** **their** **current** **capabilities** **and** **acquire** **the** **required** **competencies** **themselves** **(e.g.,** **by** **either** **training** **current** **staff** **or** **hiring** **new** **employees**). **However**, **this**, **approach**, **typically**, **takes** **time**. **Another**, **option**, **therefore**, **option**, **is** **to** **partner** **with** **other** **companies** **that** **may** **already** **have** **the** **specific** **knowledge** **to** **facilitate** **integration** **processes**. **This**, **approach** **reduces** **the** **risk** **of** **failure** **failure**. **If**, **the** **jointly** **shared** **activities**, **are** **of** **high** **strategic** **importance**, **acquiring** **the** **partner** **company** **may** **be** **an** **option** **for** **ensuring** **that** **the** **common** **resources** **and** **knowledge** and **will** **be** **retained** **in-house**.

**If** **the** **technological** **processes** **required** **for** **digital** **transformation** **business** **are** **well** **structured** **and** **not** **overly** **complex**, **outsourcing** **these** **processes** **out** **is** **another** **option** **out**. **Compared**, **to** **creating**, **the** **required**, **competencies**, **internally**, **both**, **the** **partnership** **and** **outsourcing** **options** **can** **have** **advantages** **in** **terms** **of** **lower** **initial** **investments** **and** **of** **distributing** **the** **risks** **more** **widely**. **The** **disadvantage** **of** **these** **two** **options**, **however**, **is** **that** **they** **increase** **the** **risk** **both** **of** **losing** **a** **required** **competency** **and** **of** **becoming** **dependent** **on** **a** **third** **party**. **Retaining** **the** **processes** **and** **knowledge** **required** **for** **digital** **transformation** **business** **in-house** **means** **a** **company** **can** **be** **better** **positioned**, **to**, **be**, **to** **gain** **a** **competitive** **advantage**, **from** **future** **digital**, **transformation** **business** **initiatives**.

**Table 4: Strategic Questions about Structural Changes**

| Strategy Question | Strategic Alternatives | Alternative Description | P7S1 | MB | RB | Reason for Digital Transformation Outcome |
|-------------|---------------|-----------------------|-------|------|------|------------------------------------------|
| Who is in **charge** **of** the **digital** **transformation** **endeavor** **endeavour**? | Group CEO | The **group’s** **chief** **executive** **officer** | x | x | x | - All **three** **companies** **have** **recognize** **recognized** the **complexity** **of** **digital** **transformation** **business** **and** **made** **have** **it**, **a** **top** **strategy** **strategic** **priority** **of** **the** **group**. **CEO**, **group**. |
| | CEO of **business unit** | **the** **CEO** **of** **the** **business** **unit** **that** **tackles** **the** **digital** **transformation** **business** **endeavour** | | x | - **Once** **bayerische**, **Ravens**, **as** **a** **firm** **size** **moves** **beyond** **a** **certain** **threshold**, **it** **is** **important** **to** **have**, **involve**, **senior**, **managers**, **other** **than**, **the** **group**, **CEO**, **’s** **in** **the** **digital** **transformation** **program**. **This**, **Ravens** **P7S**, **this** **applies** **for**. |
| | Group CDO | **the** **group’s** **chief** **digital** **officer** | | | | |
| | Group CIO | **the** **group’s** **chief**, **information**, **officer**, | | | | |
| Do **you** **plan** **to** **do** **integrate** **new** **operations** **into** **existing** **structures** **or** **structure** **create** **separate**, **entities** **entity**? | Integrated | **Digital** **operations** **are** **fully** **integrated** **into** **an** **organization** **organization’s** **current** **structures** **structure** | | x | x | - **Mitt** **wants** **the** **digital** **transformation** **business** **to** **happen** **in** **close** **quarters** **with** **the** **traditional** **business**. <br>**Ravens’s** **digital** **process**, **products** **complementary** **to** **its** **traditional** **products**. |
| | Separated | **Digital** **operations** **are** **implemented** **separately** **from** **the** **core** **business** | x | | x | - **P7S** **does** **not** **want** **digital** **initiatives** **to** **be** **influenced** **by** **the** **existing** **business**. <br>**Ravens** **separates** **its** **activities** **that** **go** **beyond** **mere** **complementary** **products** (**e.g.,** **online** **games**). |
| | Products **and** services** | **Changed** **products** **and** services | x | x | x | - **All** **three** **products** **have** **decided** **to** **use** **products** **digital** **products** **to** **generate**, **customer**, **experiences**, **customer** **through**, **digital**, **products**, **and**, **services** (**e.g.,**, **P7S**, **’s**, **maxdome**, **‘s** **‘**video** **on**-demand **demand**, **‘** **platform** **or** **Ravens**, **’g’s**, **‘**ti** **toi** **‘**, **pen**). |
| | **Business**, **processes**, **business** | **Improvement** **of** **business** processes | x | x | x | - **All** **three** **products** **have**, **decided**, **‘** **to**, **use**, **‘digital** **products** **to**, **enhance**, **‘** **optimize**, **‘** **their**, **business**, **processes**, **business** (**products** **e.g.,** **big** **data** **support**, **‘** inin **support** **TV** **program** **planning**, **‘**). |
| | Skills, | **A** new **set** **of** **skills** **‘** **based** **on** **digital** **‘** **technologies** **‘skills**’ | x | | x | - **‘** **Through**, **‘** **its**, **purchases**, **‘** **P**, **S**, **‘** **‘**, **automatically**, **‘** **purchases** **new** **skill** **sets**, **‘** ‘skills’. **Ravens** **wants** **to** **attract** **and** **develop** **a** **new** **set** **of** **skills** **to** **make**, **‘** **its** **separate**, **digital** **business** **unit**, **a** **success**, **‘** **.**. |
| **‘**Do **you**, **need**, **‘**to** **acquire** **new**, **competencies**, **‘**? If **so**, **how**, **‘**so**, **how** **do** **you** **plan** **to** **acquire** **them**, **‘** **them** **‘**? | **Internally** **Internal** | **Rely** **on** **the** **resources** **that** **already** **exist** **internal** | x | x | x | - **AllAll** **three** **products** **believe**, **‘** **that** **they** **need** **to** **develop** **their** **current**, **workforce**, **‘** **in** **new** **digital** **products** **‘**’. |
| | **Partnerships** **Partner** | **Foster** **partnerships** **partner** | | | | - **‘** **Purchases** **purchases** **give**, **‘** **P**, **S**, **‘** **an**, **alternate**, **‘channel** **to** **accumulate**, **digital**, **competencies**, **‘**’. |
| | **Takeovers** **Takeover** | **Accumulate** **know-how** **via** **takeovers** **takeover** | x | | | - **‘** **Mitt**, **‘** **has** **realized** **that** **it** **needs** **to** **attract** **“digital** **natives”** **for** **a**, **successful**, **digital**, **transformation**, **‘** **‘**’. |
| | **External** **sourcing** **Source** | **Source**, **additional**, **know**, **-how** **from** **outside**, **source** | | (x) | | |

### Financial Aspects Dimension
**financial** **The** **dimensions** **of** **financial** **the** **Digital** **Transformation**, **Framework**, **Financial**, **‘** **Dimension** **is** **also** **a** **significant** **aspect** **aspect** **of** **digital** **transformation** **transformations** **endeavors**. **‘** **Increasing**, **‘** **financial**, **pressure**, **pressure** **on** **the** **current**, **core**, **business**, **‘** **might** **be**, **‘** **the** **trigger**, **‘that** **convinces** **management** **of** **the** **need** **for** **action**. **And** **financial**, **resources** **will** **be** **necessary** **to** **carry** **out** **transformational**, **initiatives**, **transformations**. **Table**, **Table**, **5**, **summarizes**, **the**, **two**, **strategic**, **questions**, **that**, **managers** **must**, **ask**, **ask** **about** **the**, **financial**, **dimension** **financial** **‘dimension** **and**, **the**, **strategic**, **options**, **‘options** **available** **that** **when** **answering** **these**, **these** **questions**, **and**, **‘describes**, **how**, **‘** **and** **why**, **the** **three** **media** **companies** **have** **chosen** **the** **options** **‘options**.

#### Question 10: How Strong is the Financial Pressure on Your Current Core Business?
**The** **willingness** **of** **top** **management** **to** **undertake** **the** **necessary** **efforts** **for**, **and** **accept** **the** **ensuing** **risks** **of**, **digital** **transformation** **endeavors** **often** **depends** **on** **the** **competitiveness** **of** **the** **current** **core** **business**. **If** **the** **core** **business** **continues** **to** **create** **sufficient** **profits**, **managers** **may** **not** **see** **the** **urgency** **for** **embarking** **on** **digital** **transformation** **efforts** **or** **be** **willing** **to** **take** **the** **risks**.

**History**, **however**, **has** **shown** **that** **markets** **can** **change** **quickly** **and** **that** **acting** **too** **late** **can** **be** **fatal** **for** **companies**. **Several** **well-known** **retailers** **that** **once** **dominated** **domestic** **markets** **missed** **the** **opportunity** **to** **react** **to** **e-commerce**-driven **changes** **in** **a** **the** **timely** **manner**, **timely**, **resulting** **ultimately** **in** **business** **failure** **failure** **‘business’. **We**, **urge**, **we** **urge** **all**, **companies**, **to**, **take**, **‘** **take** **digital**, **transformation**, **‘digital**, **seriously**, **‘** **and**, **address**, **‘** **address** **its** **potential** **effects** **and** **‘** **take** **necessary** **‘changes** **measures** **‘** **immediately** **rather than** **waiting** **for** **the** **anticipated** **‘tectonic** **changes** **shifts** **to** **occur** **in** **‘‘** **how** **profits** **are** **generated** **in** **their**, **industries**, **‘‘** **‘**.

#### Question 11: How Will You Finance the **‘**Digital** **Transformation**‘** Endeavor?
**‘** **Digital**, **transformation**, **‘** **strategies** **seek** **to** **seek** **to** **maximize** **value**, **creation**, **‘** **and**, **thus**, **creation** **future**, **and** **revenues** **and**, **profits**, **and** **‘profits**. **Thus**, **to** **finance**, **their**, **digital**, **transformation**, **endeavors**, **‘** **employees**, **firms** **can**, **choose** **either** **internal** **or** **‘internal** **or** **external** **financing**, **options** **finances**. **Successfully**, **financing**, **‘** **financing** **a** **transformation**, **endeavour**, **‘** **depends** **on** **a** **firm’s** **current** **well-being** **and** **its** **future** **prospects**. **Investors** **of** **any** **kind** **must** **have** **faith** **that** **the** **digital** **transformation** **is** **beneficial** **to** **the** **firm** **and** **that** **their** **investments** **will** **therefore**, **pay**, **off**, **pay**. **Thus**, **if**, **a** **company** **is**, **already** **financially**, **struggling**, **its**, **options** **for**, **financing** **digital**, **transformations**, **will** **be** **severely** **limited**, **limited** **‘limited’.

**Table 5: Strategic Questions about the Financial Dimension of Digital Transformation**

| Strategic Question | Strategic Alternatives | Alternative Description | P751 | MB | RB | **‘**Impact for Digital **Transformation** **Outcome** |
|--------------|-------------------|---------------------|---------|------|------|-----------------------------------|
| **How** **‘how** **much** **pressure** **is** **‘** **on** **your** **current** **core** **business** **‘pressure**? | **Low** **pressure** | **‘** **Margins** **minimal** **in** **minimal** **core** **business** **remain** **‘** **mostly** **unaffected** **by** **digital** **‘** **minimal** **changes** **‘business | x | | x | - **‘**At** **P7S** (**TV**) **and**, **Ravens**, **‘** (**margins** **from** **core** **business** **margins**) **remain**, **strong**, **core** **business**. **‘** |
| | **Medium** | **Digital** **‘** **changes** **affect** **‘** **core**, **business**, **margins**, **‘** **margins**, **but** **the** **core** **business** **remains** **profitable** **‘business** | | x | | - **‘** **Mitt** **‘s** **print** **‘** **market** **suffers** **from** **market** **‘** **market** **share** **losses** **to** **digital** **‘** **substitutes** **.**. |
| | **High** | **‘** **Digital** **‘changes** **erode** **‘** **margins** | | | | |
| **How** **‘how** **will** **you**, **finance**, **‘** **the**, **digital**, **transformation**, **‘** **endeavour** **change**? | **Internal** **Funds** | **Finance** **digital** **‘** **fund** **transformation** **through**