See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/292336459](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/292336459_The_Relationship_Between_Board-Level_Technology_Committees_and_Reported_Security_Breaches?enrichId=rgreq-57c648b5bf021738378cb3db289d916e-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI5MjMzNjQ1OTtBUzo0OTU3MDMzNzQ5OTU0NTZAMTQ5NTE5NjMwMjU4MA%3D%3D&el=1_x_2&_esc=publicationCoverPdf)

### [The Relationship Between Board-Level Technology Committees and Reported](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/292336459_The_Relationship_Between_Board-Level_Technology_Committees_and_Reported_Security_Breaches?enrichId=rgreq-57c648b5bf021738378cb3db289d916e-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI5MjMzNjQ1OTtBUzo0OTU3MDMzNzQ5OTU0NTZAMTQ5NTE5NjMwMjU4MA%3D%3D&el=1_x_3&_esc=publicationCoverPdf) Security Breaches

**Article** in Journal of Information Systems · January 2016

DOI: 10.2308/isys-51402

| CITATIONS |                                   | READS |                                 |
|-----------|-----------------------------------|-------|---------------------------------|
| 149       |                                   | 2,157 |                                 |
|           |                                   |       |                                 |
|           | 4 authors, including:             |       |                                 |
|           | Robert Pinsker                    |       | Thomas Smith                    |
|           | Florida Atlantic University       |       | University of South Florida     |
|           | 65 PUBLICATIONS   1,994 CITATIONS |       | 22 PUBLICATIONS   522 CITATIONS |
|           | SEE PROFILE                       |       | SEE PROFILE                     |
|           |                                   |       |                                 |
|           |                                   |       |                                 |

All content following this page was uploaded by [Robert Pinsker](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Robert-Pinsker?enrichId=rgreq-57c648b5bf021738378cb3db289d916e-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI5MjMzNjQ1OTtBUzo0OTU3MDMzNzQ5OTU0NTZAMTQ5NTE5NjMwMjU4MA%3D%3D&el=1_x_10&_esc=publicationCoverPdf) on 19 May 2017.

*The Accounting Review • Issues in Accounting Education • Accounting Horizons Accounting and the Public Interest • Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory Behavioral Research in Accounting • Current Issues in Auditing Journal of Emerging Technologies in Accounting • Journal of Information Systems Journal of International Accounting Research Journal of Management Accounting Research • The ATA Journal of Legal Tax Research The Journal of the American Taxation Association*

# Online Early — Preprint of Accepted Manuscript

This is a PDF file of a manuscript that has been accepted for publication in an American Accounting Association journal. It is the final version that was uploaded and approved by the author(s). While the paper has been through the usual rigorous peer review process for AAA journals, it has not been copyedited, nor have the graphics and tables been modified for final publication. Also note that the paper may refer to online Appendices and/or Supplements that are not yet available. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting and review of page proofs before it is published in its final form, therefore the published version will look different from this version and may also have some differences in content.

We have posted this preliminary version of the manuscript as a service to our members and subscribers in the interest of making the information available for distribution and citation as quickly as possible following acceptance.

**The DOI for this manuscript and the correct format for citing the paper are given at the top of the online (html) abstract.**

**Once the final published version of this paper is posted online, it will replace this preliminary version at the specified DOI.**

### **The Relationship Between Board-Level Technology Committees and Reported Security Breaches**

Julia L. Higgs Associate Professor of Accounting Florida Atlantic University

Robert Pinsker Associate Professor of Accounting Florida Atlantic University Phone: (561) 297-3422 Email: rpinsker@fau.edu

preprint Thomas Smith Assistant Professor of Accountancy University of South Florida

accepted manuscript George Young Associate Professor of Accounting Florida Atlantic University

October 2014

The authors wish to thank Roger Debreceny; Gregory Jonas, Uday Murthy, participants at the 2014 American Accounting Association meeting, and workshop participants at the University of South Florida, for their helpful suggestions.

### **The Relationship Between Board-Level Technology Committees and Reported Security Breaches**

#### **ABSTRACT**

After several high-profile data security breaches (e.g., Target Corporation, Michaels, Home Depot), corporate boards are prioritizing oversight of Information Technology (IT) risk. Firms are also increasingly faced with disclosure decisions regarding IT security breaches. This study proposes that firms can use the creation of a board-level technology committee as part of the firm's information technology governance (ITG) to signal the firm's ability to detect and respond to security breaches.

preprint accepted manuscript Using reported security breaches during the time period 2005-2014, results indicate that firms with technology committees are more likely to have reported breaches in a given year than are firms without the committee. Further analysis suggests that this positive association is driven by relatively young technology committees and external source breaches. Specifically, as a technology committee becomes more established, its firm is not as likely to be breached. To obtain further evidence on the perceived value of a technology committee, this study uses a returns analysis and finds that the presence of a technology committee mitigates the negative abnormal stock returns arising from external breaches. Findings add to the evolving ITG literature, as well to the signaling theory and disclosure literatures.

#### **Key words: governance; breach, disclosure; technology committee; security**

"Cyber-attacks present the greatest threat to our national and economic security today, and the magnitude of the threat is growing."

- Dianne Feinstein, Chairwoman of the U.S. Senate Intelligence Committee (Thomson Reuters 2014).

#### **I. INTRODUCTION**

preprint The purpose of this study is to expand the information technology governance (ITG), signaling, and disclosure literatures by investigating the relationship between a board of directors' (henceforth, board) level technology committee and reported security breaches.1 Specifically, we examine 1) when is having a board-level technology committee associated with reported breaches and 2) how does the market react when a firm with a board-level technology committee is breached? We control for the firm specific factors that prior research finds to explain the decision to form a technology committee, as well as the presence of other board level committees that may have a role in preventing or reporting breaches (e.g., the risk and compliance committees).

accepted manuscript According to the fifth principle of COBIT 5 (ISACA 2013a), there should be a separation of governance from management. In publicly-traded firms, governance is the responsibility of the board. The principles, policies, and frameworks model set forth by COBIT 5 states that the board and executive management define governance objectives and enterprise values. Specific to the focus of our study, both COBIT 5 and *COBIT for Information Security* (ISACA 2013b) suggest that information security policies be driven by the board's recommendations. The board

<sup>1</sup> The requirements of firms to report known security breaches are diverse and include both voluntary and involuntary disclosures. For example, there are a myriad of state laws regarding requirements to notify individuals when personally identifiable information is compromised. See http://www.ncsl.org/research/telecommunicationsand-information-technology/security-breach-notification-laws.aspx for a summary. For public firms, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) encourages, but does not require disclosure. However, Home Depot (September 8, 2014; September 18, 2014) and J.P. Morgan Chase (October 2, 2014) have filed a Form 8-K either under section 7.1 (Regulation Fair Disclosure) or section 8.01 "other events." Also see http://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R42475.pdf for further information on breach reporting requirements.

is responsible for oversight matters; thus, the tone set by the board influences the investments by management to prevent, report, and control data security breaches. Our research is motivated by the notion that having a technology committee sends the signal to the market that the firm places IT risk oversight as a high priority, because of the dedication of specific resources to that particular issue. Consequently, we incorporate signaling theory (Spence 1973; Bhattacharya 1979; Miller and Rock 1985) as a means of explaining why a firm would have a board-level technology committee as a form of governance.

preprint accepted manuscript There is new evidence that firms, in general, are increasingly taking notice of cyberattacks. As of June 29, 2014, 1,517 firms traded on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) or NASDAQ have listed some version of cybersecurity, hacking, cyber-attacks, or data breach as a business risk in securities filings (Yadron 2014). This number is up from 1,288 firms in all of 2013 and 879 firms in 2012. Yet, despite the increased risk, many boards of public firms have been inconsistent in their approaches to cybersecurity monitoring with some using the full boards; some using the audit committee; others using a technology committee; and still others not actively monitoring it altogether (DiPietro 2013). Further, per SEC Commissioner Luis Aguilar, there may be a gap between the magnitude of the risk that security breaches present and the steps boards have taken to address the risks (Yadron 2014). The implication is that many firms remain unprepared for the risks. According to the National Association of Corporate Directors (NACD 2014), most firms have traditionally assigned cyber risk oversight to the audit committee; however, there is currently an increasing trend toward using technology committees. While the research on audit committee effectiveness is relatively mature, we are not aware of related academic research on technology committees. Accordingly, our study investigates the relationship between having a board-level technology committee and reported security breaches.

Breaches can have material effects on a firm's financial position. A recent Cost of Cyber Crime study involving 60 firms from various industries documented that a cyber-attack costs the average firm \$11.6 million per year and that the average firm experienced 2.0 successful attacks per week (this number has been steadily increasing since 2010 [Ponemon Institute 2013]).2 Globally, the average cost of a breach is \$3.5 million and the likelihood that a firm will have a data breach that involves 10,000 records or more is 22%. The average cost of each lost or stolen record that contained sensitive and confidential information is \$145 (Ponemon Institute 2014). For large firms, the cost is even greater. For example, according to Adler (2011), the average cost of a data breach is \$214 per customer record. Using that average cost to extrapolate Target's 2013 Black Friday breach of as many as 110 million customer accounts illustrates the potential costs facing firms. Consequently, breaches have been shown to negatively impact firm valuation (Gordon et al. 2010; Chai et al. 2011).

preprint accepted manuscript Recognizing that the frequency and costs of security breaches continue to escalate, the Division of Corporate Finance (DCF) of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) reiterated earlier guidance for disclosure obligations concerning cybersecurity risks and cyber incidents (SEC 2011). Firms' responses to the SEC's act of "encouraging" disclosure can be considered a form of regulatory compliance. Therefore, establishing a separate technology committee could improve governance by increasing the likelihood of disclosure (i.e., reporting breaches), and helping to signal credibility in other ways such as by preventing and identifying breaches. Conversely, as the DCF notes (p. 1) in its guidance, detailed disclosures of security breaches could provide "a 'roadmap' for those who seek to infiltrate a registrant's network

<sup>2</sup> A successful attack is one where the target is breached and data is compromised. In contrast, an unsuccessful attack is one where an attempt is made to breach a target, but is unable to penetrate the defenses.

security." Thus, the existence of a technology committee could signal an opportunity for hackers to attack a firm (i.e., create a higher likelihood of a breach).

preprint We examine the relationship between technology committees and security breaches over the period of 2005-2014. We find that firms with a technology committee have a significantly greater likelihood of being breached relative to firms without technology committees, and that this finding is robust to alternative matching techniques to address endogeneity. In trying to understand why firms may elect various committees to respond to different risks, we find that the external breaches are more likely for firms with board-level technology committees while internal breaches are more likely for firms with risk and compliance committees. We further find that as a technology committee becomes more established, the firm is less likely to be breached. This result suggests that over time technology committees play a role in preventing, not just detecting and reporting, breaches. Although having a technology committee may be a response to the risk of an external breach, the continued existence of the committee appears to result in risk mitigation of future breaches.

# accepted

manuscript Next, we conduct a returns analysis in order to understand how the market interprets reported breaches and whether the market response is affected by having a technology committee. Initial results support the prior literature's findings that a security breach is associated with a negative market reaction. Further analysis suggests that external breaches are associated with significantly negative returns, but the presence of a technology committee mitigates their negative market reaction. We interpret this finding as evidence that the market positively perceives the presence of board-level technology committees when evaluating the information content of a reported breach. Specifically, our main returns analysis is consistent

with the market reacting to a firm-provided signal that it has governance mechanisms in place to better handle the risk associated with security breaches.

preprint Our findings should be interesting to boards considering various governance mechanisms related to minimizing the reputational and compliance costs associated with security breaches. Specifically, our findings seem to offer support for the decision to form a board-level technology committee. While forming a board-level technology committee appears to initially increase the likelihood of being breached, over time this negative effect is mitigated. In addition, the market appears to reward firms with less negative reactions to breaches. The evidence is helpful to corporate governance and voluntary disclosure researchers who are interested in board monitoring behavior and its relationship to IT. We seek to add to the extant ITG and technology committee literatures by using a focus framed within the rubric of COBIT.3 Finally, we contend that this study provides an important first step in establishing associations between board-level technology committees, signaling, and an important aspect of IT risk, information security.

accepted manuscript The remainder of this paper is presented as follows. The next section describes the relevant literature and provides the research questions. The following section describes the research method. The results and conclusion sections are at the end.

#### **II. LITERATURE REVIEW AND RESEARCH QUESTION DEVELOPMENT**

#### **IT Governance**

ITG is defined by Debreceny (2013, 129) as "the process by which organizations seek to ensure that their investment in information technology facilitates strategic and tactical goals." It

<sup>3</sup> We refer generally to COBIT in some places, because our sample period subsumes multiple COBIT iterations. For example, COBIT 5 (ISACA 2013a) was publicly available approximately mid-2013; the latter part of our sample period. It is important to note, however, that the fifth principle specifying the need to separate governance and management, has not materially changed in the different iterations.

represents an increasingly important subset of the broader corporate governance environment. For example, ITG has recently been systematically adopted by larger firms (Debreceny 2013). A 2011 ISACA survey indicates that more than 70 percent of organizations with less than 500 fulltime employee equivalents (FTEs) and 85 percent of organizations with more than 500 FTEs report the existence of some ITG processes. Additionally, investment in IT typically represents a significant proportion of current capital spending in many industries (Debreceny 2013). Thus, the relative importance of ITG in organizational value is readily apparent (Masli et al. 2011; Tambe and Hitt 2012).

preprint accepted manuscript Debreceny (2013, 129) argues that perhaps the most important element of ITG is the role of its governing bodies (e.g., the board of directors) in the oversight and direction of IT. Successful adoption of ITG is challenging and little is known about what constitutes a highlyeffective ITG structure. There are many aspects of ITG that involve governing bodies such as the board and related committees, as well as their interactions with management. Further, there are many segments of IT that firms need to consider (e.g., security, user management, enterprise architecture; Debreceny 2013). A recent survey of more than 250 board members indicates that cybersecurity is a rising concern of the board, surpassing compliance risk (Tysiac 2014). Kwon et al. (2013) investigate whether *executive* role and type of compensation scheme is associated with security breach occurrences. They find that security breaches are less common when IT executives are involved in the leadership team and when they are compensated based on behaviors rather than outcomes. We extrapolate the premise that involvement at the board level has an impact on the cybersecurity component of IT risk.

The number of data breaches experienced and reported has been growing over time and is expected to continue to increase (DiPietro 2013). Consequently, one of the more recent issues to

emerge for boards to consider is cybersecurity preparedness, monitoring, and in some cases incident response and reporting (Card 2011). Fortunately, the firms' governing bodies appear to be aware of this issue. A recent report from Kroll (2013) predicts greater interest of corporate board committees in cybersecurity risks and the firms' plans for addressing them. Specifically, boards are beginning to focus on the connection between cybersecurity and the firms' financial well-being. In June 2014, the NACD issued a Cyber-risk Oversight Handbook, which includes five steps boards should implement to address this risk (NACD 2014).

preprint How corporate boards oversee and manage IT-related risks is poorly understood. As Bart and Turel (2010, 148) note, the related conceptual research is helpful in terms of broadcasting the importance of ITG and suggesting frameworks, but there is insufficient empirical research on actual board behavior to substantiate the conceptual arguments. Further, under the NYSE rules (2014, section 303A.07), audit committees have the primary responsibility for risk oversight, although this can be assumed by the entire board or assigned to other committees.

accepted manuscript There is a risk to the firm of adding too many responsibilities to the audit committee. Thus, forming a technology committee may be helpful in preventing dilution of the audit committee's effectiveness. According to Premuroso and Bhattacharya (2007, 1260), technology committees are formed to address issues related to IT, science, and significant changes related to or affecting intellectual property. Arguably, oversight of IT risk would be the responsibility of a technology committee. Further, the Spencer Stuart Board Index (2012) reports that approximately seven percent of Standard and Poor's (S&P) 500 boards have what is termed a "Science and Technology Committee." It is important to note that this percentage represents an upward trend as it is higher than the five percent reported in 2005 and the zero percent reported in 2000.

preprint Increasing regulation within the business landscape makes boards more aware of the importance of information security for information and IT-related assets (ISACA 2013b). The challenge for firms is that regulators (see earlier DCF guidance) and investors want more information regarding cyber-attacks, yet firms do not want to give hackers a road map to their networks (Strohm 2013). A recent HBGary Inc. (2013) report indicates that 70% of investors are interested in reviewing firms' cybersecurity practices and nearly 80% would not likely consider investing in firms with a history of cyber-attacks. Thus, firms need to consider an ITG mechanism involving cybersecurity that can satisfy regulatory compliance and investor demand for information, while managing the risk surrounding breaches. Forming a distinct board committee (i.e., a technology committee) has been one option chosen by some of the leading (Standard & Poor's [S&P] 500) firms. As discussed below, formation of this type of committee fits into the recommendations made by the COBIT 5 (ISACA 2013a) framework.

#### **COBIT 5**

accepted manuscript The transcendent nature of ITG allows it to fit well into particular governance frameworks. Although ISO 38500 (International Organization for Standardization/International Electrotechnical Commission International [ISO/IEC] 2008) is structured as higher level guidance, the revised COBIT 5 (ISACA 2013a) framework and its security (ISACA 2013b) guidance provides more operational guidance. In general, COBIT provides a foundation for ITG to be understood and measured (Debreceny 2013).

*COBIT for Information Security* (ISACA 2013b) refers to a number of important boardrelated issues such as: roles and job titles; committees; processes; and policies. As part of its recommendations, *COBIT for Information Security*'*s* "initiate a program" process BAI01.02 suggests appointing either a program board or other committee to ensure that all security-related information that is gathered or produced is secured. We infer that this section conceptually describes the oversight role of the board-level technology committee.

#### **Signaling Theory**

Given the importance of U.S. public firm disclosures, as evidenced by regulator concerns over cybersecurity (e.g., the SEC's DCF cybersecurity guidance previously discussed), we believe that public firms send signals to the marketplace on IT-related risk. The focus of our research is the particular signal sent by the board in relation to cybersecurity by having a boardlevel technology committee.

preprint accepted manuscript Signaling theory was originally conceived to explain how education signals quality in the labor market (Spence 1973). The premise behind the theory is that when parties have asymmetric information, costly signals can be sent to create a separating equilibrium between those who can credibly signal (and incur the costs of doing so) and those who cannot. In Spence's labor market example, employees signal ability by obtaining an education beyond mandatory levels. The education is costly in terms of time and money; however, only those people who have the discipline to finish the education can signal.

Since the publication of this seminal article, signaling theory has been expanded to other business contexts. For example, the management of an initial public offering firm signals quality by retaining a large percentage of ownership (Leland and Pyle 1977), declaring a dividend signals future prospects (Bhattacharya 1979; John and Williams 1985; and Miller and Rock 1985), and hiring a high quality auditor signals financial reporting quality (Firth and Liau-Tan 1998).

Premuroso and Bhattacharya (2007) find a positive association between strong corporate governance metrics and the likelihood of forming a technology committee for S&P 500 firms. As previously mentioned, ITG is continually evolving. Specific board-level committees related to any IT aspects for the majority of firms were scarce in the time period surrounding the Premuroso and Bhattacharya study. Thus, the authors argue (p. 1262) that the formation of technology committees can be seen as a first-mover advantage, while suggesting that such a committee is an example of good governance practices.

preprint accepted manuscript Management (and in turn, the board) has private information about the firm's IT risk, a necessary condition for a signal. The company with a risk management program will know, for example, what data is vulnerable, the value of the data, and the extent to which the firm has invested in controls. One way to signal to the market that the firm is willing and able to address related IT risks is through the formation of a board-level technology committee. A board-level committee is costly and requires a charter, mandatory committee meetings, additional director compensation, and information reported annually in the proxy statement to shareholders regarding committee activities. Further, board members serving on this committee put reputational capital at risk if adverse events happen on their watch. Thus, boards will be reluctant to form a specialized committee unless its members have sufficient expertise. Srinivasan (2005) reports that independent directors of firms that have restatements face greater turnover than do directors from non-restatement firms. The penalty is even greater for independent directors who serve on audit committees of restatement firms. As this research indicates, reputational capital is at risk when board members do not exercise appropriate oversight.

Previous governance research may inform the desirability of having specialized boardlevel committees. Carcello and Neal (2003) show that strong audit committee members are positioned to protect auditors who issue new going concern opinions. Abbott et al. (2004) find that audit committee diligence and having a financial expert is associated with lower levels of non-fraud restatements.

preprint accepted manuscript Although Bart and Turel (2010) provide some answers to IT-related questions board members consider in their ITG role, their sample predominantly comprises board members from non-public firms where the need for security is arguably lower. Thus, we reiterate their statement that little is currently known regarding actual board involvement related to ITG and add that little is known about ITG board involvement with respect to public firms and consequent investor behavior. The signal sent by the existence of a board-level committee implies multiple positive items that could result in differing outcomes. The committee would be actively involved in oversight, which would include identifying and mitigating IT-related risk; therefore, controls are more likely to be stronger for these firms. Certeris paribus, we would expect fewer breaches among these firms. The firms that have strong board oversight, such as that provided by a technology committee, will likely have procedures in place to detect breaches that occur. Ironically, this potentially results in more *reported* breaches. On the other hand, firms without those same systems may not even be aware that a breach has occurred. Further, the type of breach risk (internal versus external) has been specifically identified in the anecdotal literature (several times in the popular "Krebs on Security" blog) and suggested in academic research (Wang et al. 2013) as a factor in the board's use of a technology committee. Given the high level of uncertainty pertinent to this area of study, we express our research issue in the form of the following question:

#### **RQ1: When is the presence of a board-level technology committee associated with reported breaches?**

preprint Prior financial accounting research has extensively used market reaction studies to explore whether and how the market interprets unexpected news events (e.g., Beaver 1968; Easton and Zmijewski 1989). In the context of corporate board announcements, these studies have explored whether the market values independent directors (Gordon 2007) and financial experts (Defond et al. 2005). Previous studies have also established that there is a negative market reaction to the announcement of cybersecurity breaches (Ettredge and Richardson 2001; Campbell et al. 2003; Cavusoglu et al. 2004; Kannan et al. 2007; Goel and Shawky 2009). Gwebu et al. (2013) indicate that contextual factors related to a breached firm impact both the magnitude and direction of stock price responses. They examine firm pre-breach reputation and response strategies after a breach, both of which represent areas under the auspices of ITG. Gwebu et al.'s evidence shows that 1) pre-breach reputation is important for protecting firm value after a breach occurs and 2) the type of response strategy (ingratiation versus apology) significantly impacts the negative consequences of a breach.

accepted manuscript Given the previously-cited research and our earlier discussion of COBIT's relevance to information security, the presence of a board-level technology committee may signal positive information to the market about the ability of the firm to identify and respond to the breaches (i.e., the perception of a technology committee as a detective and corrective control). Identifying a breach in a timely fashion requires a sound internal control foundation and is critical, because remediation costs increase over time. Arguably, the market is sophisticated enough to understand this concept, and will, therefore, value the existence of a board-level technology committee as a valid governance mechanism for dealing with cybersecurity.

 Alternatively, a firm with a board-level technology committee that is unable to prevent breaches may be viewed negatively by the market. When examining firms' internal risk

environments, Wang et al. (2013) find that the market reaction to a reported breach is different depending on the nature of the preceding information security risk disclosure. Extrapolating their study to our context, a negative market reaction occurring after the disclosed formation of a board-level technology committee may be due to a perception of poor ITG (i.e., the perception of a technology committee as an ineffective, preventive control).

 Since it is unclear how the market will react when there is a breach announcement, we present the following research question:

**RQ 2: How does the market react when firms with board-level technology committees are breached?** 

#### **III. RESEARCH METHOD**

#### **Sample**

preprint accepted manuscript Our breach sample comes from the intersection of privacyrights.org and COMPUSTAT. We investigate our RQ1 by examining 49,924 firm year observations with data available through COMPUSTAT.<sup>4</sup> We manually identify public firms involved in breaches reported by privacyrights.org – a data source used in prior research (Gwebu et al. 2013). Privacyrights.org reports breaches from a variety of sources, including state governments, which have mandated the reporting of breaches since 2005 (Gwebu et al. 2013). This procedure yields a sample of 634 reported breaches involving 362 firms with the first breach reported on February 12, 2005 and the final breach reported on March 5, 2014.5 We then use Audit Analytics to identify 89 firms that that have a board-level committee with the word "technology" in the name. We are able to

<sup>4</sup> As we discuss later in this section, we test RQ1 using both a smaller propensity score matched sample as well as the full sample.

<sup>5</sup> Note that this database only includes breaches that are required by law to be disclosed. These are typically breaches that involve compromised data related to parties outside of the breached firm. Thus, breaches that do not put third parties at risk are not typically required to be disclosed.

manually confirm the existence of 75 of these committees by reviewing the annual proxy statements. Finally, our multivariate tests rely on annual data from COMPUSTAT, which causes us to eliminate additional breaches in the same year for the same firm, eliminate observations with missing data, and truncate the breach data after 2013. These additional data requirements reduce our usable breach data to 281 breach year observations and 52 firms with technology committees. Because other board level committees may have a role in reported breaches, we also obtain data for compliance and risk committees and use these as controls in our analyses. We use a similar method to identify firms with compliance and risk committees.6

For tests of RQ2, we use Eventus to examine the three-day abnormal return surrounding the date the breach is disclosed (per privacyrights.org). By restricting our analysis to the short window surrounding the breach announcement, we are able to examine multiple breaches in the same calendar year for a given firm, and have a sample of 390 breach dates.

preprint

#### **Breach Determinant Analysis**

accepted manuscript We explore RQ1 by examining whether the presence of a technology committee is related to the likelihood of reported breaches by using a multivariate logistic model. Our model includes measures of size, leverage, and profitability adapted from Premuroso and Bhattacharya (2007). We expect a positive coefficient estimate for size, a negative coefficient estimate for loss, and a positive coefficient for leverage, consistent with larger (loss) firms being more (less) attractive breach targets, and less financially flexible firms being less financially equipped to take measures to reduce breaches.

<sup>6</sup> We use the "director and officer changes" dataset within audit analytics to conduct our search of committee names. This dataset includes announcements involving board changes such as the appointment of a person to a board-level committee. We search the announcement database for specific words that indicate the existence of a board-level committee with a particular name. The committees were manually verified using proxy statements. Our technology (risk, compliance) committee firms have a board-level committee with the word "technology (risk, compliance)" in its name.

Our model also includes measures of research and development (R&D) expenses and whether the firm had previously reported a breach to control for additional factors likely to explain breaches. We expect a positive coefficient for R&D as firms with these expenses are more likely to possess intellectual property and thus be a more attractive target for hackers. We also expect a positive coefficient for prior breach disclosures.

We also include indicator variables identifying firms with board-level committees. We expect the presence of board-level committees to be related to the likelihood of a breach occurring as well as being related to the likelihood of disclosing the breach. Specifically, we include indicators identifying firms with "risk" and/or "compliance" committees. Firms could potentially assign IT risk to these groups, although we believe that members of a technology committee are more likely to be subject matter experts for this risk category.

We estimate the following logistic regression to investigate RQ1:

preprint accepted Prob (*BREACH* = 1) = F[ß0 + ß1(*SIZE*) + ß2(*R&D*) + ß3(*LEVERAGE*) + ß4(*LOSS*) + ß5(*PAST\_BREACH*) + ß6(*RISK\_COMMITTEE*) + ß7(*COMPLIANCE\_COMMITTEE*) + ß8(*TECH\_COMMITTEE*) + ] (1)

manuscript where *BREACH* is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm has a reported breach in the current fiscal year, or zero otherwise; *SIZE* is the log of total assets at the beginning of the fiscal year; *R&D* is the log of research & development expenses; *LEVERAGE* is the ratio of beginning total liabilities divided by beginning total assets; *LOSS* is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm reported negative net income, or zero otherwise; *PAST\_BREACH* is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm had a reported breach on privacyrights.org in a past fiscal period starting with 2005, or zero otherwise; *RISK\_COMMITTEE* is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm discloses the presence of a board-level committee with the word "risk" in the title in the proxy statement released prior to the date of the breach, or zero otherwise;

*COMPLIANCE\_COMMITTEE* is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm discloses the presence of a board-level committee with the word "compliance" in the title as reported in the proxy statement released prior to the date of the breach, or zero otherwise; and *TECH\_COMMITTEE* is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm discloses the presence of a board-level committee with the word "technology" in the title in the proxy statement released prior to the date of the breach, or zero otherwise. Our coefficient of interest is ß8, where a negative (positive) coefficient is consistent with the presence of a technology committee reducing (increasing) the likelihood of observing a reported breach.

preprint accepted manuscript The decision to form a technology committee is not random. We attempt to address this endogeneity concern (i.e., firms likely to form technology committees may also be more [or less] likely to be breached) in two ways. First, we take a propensity score matching approach consistent with Lawrence et al. (2011). Specifically, we estimate a technology committee prediction model and obtain probability estimates of having a technology committee. We then match non-technology committee firms with each technology committee firm based on the predicted value within a maximum distance of three percent.7,8 Next, we estimate equation (1) on this matched sample of firms.<sup>9</sup> Our technology committee prediction model includes variables from Premuroso and Bhattacharya (2007) to explain the decision to form a technology committee, as well as additional independent control variables from our breach determinant model [equation (1)].

<sup>7</sup> We also perform a propensity score match based on the probability of reporting a breach. Our inferences are robust to this alternative matching technique and we discuss the results (untabulated) from this analysis in our sensitivity section.

<sup>8</sup> Consistent with Dehejia and Wahba (2002), to increase the precision of our estimates we do not limit the number of control firm that can be matched to one treatment firm. Further, we allow the number of control firms that can be matched to a treatment firm to vary and require our control firms to be within a 3 percent caliper distance (consistent with Lawrence et al. 2011) to limit the bias that a one to many match can create (Haviland et al. 2007).

#### *TECH\_COMMITTEE* = γ0 + γ1(*R&D Exp.*) + γ2(*NPM*) + γ3(*ROE*) + γ4(*LEV*) + γ5(*ROA*) + γ6(*WC*) + γ7(*Tobin's q*) + γ8(*LOGTA*) + γ9(*LOSS*) + γ10(*IC\_WEAKNESS*) + γ11(*PAST\_BREACH*) + γ12(*RISK\_COMMITTEE*) + γ13(*COMPLIANCE\_COMMITTEE*) + ε (2)

where *R&D Exp.* is research and development and in-process R&D expense reported on the income statement; *NPM,* net profit margin, is net income divided by total revenue; *ROE*, return on equity, is net income divided by average shareholder equity; *LEV*, a measure of leverage, is long-term debt divided by average shareholder equity; *ROA,* return on assets, is net income divided by average assets; *WC*, working capital, is current assets divided by current liabilities; *Tobin's q*, is market value of equity divided by assets; *LOGTA* is the natural log of total assets; *LOSS* is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm reported negative net income, or zero otherwise; *IC\_WEAKNESS* is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the company has a material weakness in internal controls over financial reporting, or zero otherwise.

preprint accepted manuscript Alternatively, we also conduct a Heckman (1979) two stage approach, which represents a technique that does not significantly reduce the number of breach observations we are able to investigate. Under this approach, we first estimate equation (2) using a probit model specification (first stage), and then include the inverse Mills ratio from the first stage as an additional control variable added to equation (1). Consistent with Lennox et al. (2012), our technology committee model (first stage) includes a set of variables omitted from the second stage known as exclusion restrictions.10 This approach allows us to examine all breach observations using the following equation:

<sup>10</sup> Consistent with the recommendations of Lennox et al. (2012) we include a number of exclusion restriction variables (NPM, ROE, ROA, WC, Tobin's q, IC\_WEAKNESS) in our estimation of equation (2). We select these variables because Premuroso and Bhattacharya (2007) suggest that they are important determinants of technology committee selection, but we do not expect and/or do not find them to be directly associated with breaches. This approach reduces the likelihood of severe multicollinearity influencing our results. Among all of our model

 Prob (*BREACH* = 1) = F[ß0 + ß1(*SIZE*) + ß2(*R&D*) + ß3(*LEVERAGE*) + ß4(*LOSS*) + ß5(*PAST\_BREACH*) + ß6(*RISK\_COMMITTEE*) + ß7(*COMPLIANCE\_COMMITTEE*) + ß8(*TECH\_COMMITTEE*) + ß9(*IMR*) + ] (3)

where *IMR* is the inverse Mills ratio found using equation (2). Our coefficient of interest remains ß8 under this specification.

We also examine whether the association between reported breaches and technology committees varies with the tenure of the technology committee. We suspect that firms with more established technology committees will be less likely to have reported breaches, because they will be more effective at preventing breaches or detecting them before the breaches rise to the level requiring disclosure. We explore this question by estimating the following regressions for our propensity score match subsample and full sample respectively:

preprint Prob (*BREACH* = 1) = F[ß0 + ß1(*SIZE*) + ß2(*R&D*) + ß3(*LEVERAGE*) + ß4(*LOSS*) + ß5(*PAST\_BREACH*) + ß6(*RISK\_COMMITTEE*) + ß7(*COMPLIANCE\_COMMITTEE*) + ß8(*TECH\_COMMITTEE*) + ß9(*OLD\_TECH\_COMMITTEE*) + ] (4)

accepted manuscript Prob (*BREACH* = 1) = F[ß0 + ß1(*SIZE*) + ß2(*R&D*) + ß3(*LEVERAGE*) + ß4(*LOSS*) + ß5(*PAST\_BREACH*) + ß6(*RISK\_COMMITTEE*) + ß7(*COMPLIANCE\_COMMITTEE*) + ß8(*TECH\_COMMITTEE*) + ß9(*OLD\_TECH\_COMMITTEE*) + ß10(*IMR*) + ] (5)

where *OLD\_TECH\_COMMITTEE* is an indicator variable identifying firms with committees that are considered more established (i.e., committees that have been in existence longer than the median age of the technology committees in the sample).

 To determine sensitivity, we perform an additional analysis by examining which type of breach, *EXTERNAL\_BREACH* versus *INTERNAL\_BREACH*, is more likely when firms have a

specifications the highest variance inflation factor (VIF) score on our IMR variable is 2.25, which is well below the conventional cutoff of 10 (Feng et al. 2009).

technology committee.11 We identify the type of breach using the information from privacyrights.org. For the *EXTERNAL\_BREACH* variable, we code any breach with the description of "HACK," "PORT (portable device theft)," or "STAT (stationary [i.e., server] theft)" as one or zero otherwise. For the *INTERNAL\_BREACH* variable, we code breaches with the descriptions of "DISC (unintended disclosure);" "PHYS (physical loss);" "INSD (insiders);" "CARD (payment card fraud);" and "UNKN (unknown)" or zero otherwise.

#### **Returns Analysis**

preprint accepted manuscript To test RQ2, we use Eventus to examine the market adjusted value weighted abnormal return in the window (-1, +1) surrounding the disclosure date of the breach per privacyrights.org, consistent with the approach used by Goel and Shawky (2009). We then examine whether the presence of a technology committee explains the breach event returns. Similar to our earlier testing, we include the inverse Mills ratio from equation (1), and control for the presence of a risk and/or compliance committee. We are able to separately examine multiple breaches within the same fiscal year in our returns analysis. We distinguish between breaches that originated from external sources relative to internal sources, and examine whether more established technology committees differentially impact breach returns. Formally, the model we use to test RQ2 is as follows:

$$
CAR_{(-1,+1)} = B_0 + B_1(RISK\_COMMITIES) + B_2(COMPLIANCE\_COMMITIES) +B_3(TECH\_COMMITIES) + B_4(PAST_BREACH) + B_5(EXTERNAL_BREACH) +B_6(EXTERNAL_BREACH*TECH_COMMITTEE) +B_7(OLD_TECH\_COMMITTEE) + B_8(IMR) +
$$
 (6)

where *CAR* is the three day value weighted market model cumulative abnormal return surrounding the date the breach was reported (per privacyrights.org); *EXTERNAL\_BREACH* is

<sup>11</sup> Due to the limited sample of breaches among our propensity score match subsample, we only conduct this analysis among our full sample where endogeneity is addressed using the inverse Mills ratio.

an indicator variable defined as previously discussed; *OLD\_TECH\_COMMITTEE* is an indicator variable if the technology committee is older than the median aged technology committee; and *IMR* is the inverse Mills ratio (from equation 2).

#### **IV. RESULTS**

#### **Breach Determinant Analysis for Testing RQ1**

We report descriptive statistics for the variables used to conduct our test of RQ1 in Table 1. Panel A of Table 1 reports various univariate descriptive statistics for all variables in our full sample. We report that 37.7% of our observations report losses, 0.7% of firm year observations report the existence of a board-level technology committee, and 1.3% (1.0%) reports the existence of a risk (compliance) committee.

preprint accepted manuscript The remaining panels of Table 1 report descriptive statistics for both our full sample and propensity score matched sample based on whether or not the firm reported the existence of a board-level technology committee (Panel B) and whether or not the firm reported a breach in the current year (Panel C). Panel B reports that the 355 observations reporting the existence of a board-level technology committee are on average larger, are less likely to report a loss, and have larger research and development expense. Further, firms with technology committees are also more likely to have "risk" committees and "compliance" committees, consistent with the notion that "technology" committees provide an oversight function that is distinct from other committees. We also find that the technology committee subsample is more likely to have reported a prior breach, suggesting that firms with a technology committee have a generally higher breach risk. Further, we find that firms with a board-level technology committee report breaches significantly more often than do those without a technology committee (2.5% vs. 0.5%; p-value<0.01), and that this increase in reported breaches appears to be driven by external breaches (2.0% vs. 0.3%; p-value<0.01). Consistent with the intuition behind propensity score matching, we observe fewer differences in variable means among our propensity match sample of firms. However, even among this more homogenous group, firms with technology committees are marginally more likely to suffer an external breach (1.7% vs. 0.5%; p-value = 0.09), are larger, have more R&D expense, are less likely to suffer a loss, and are more likely to have a compliance committee.

preprint accepted manuscript Panel C reports that among the 281 firm year observations where a breach was reported, the breached firms are larger and are less likely to report a loss in the current year. In addition, breached firms are also more likely to have reported a breach in the past, and have board-level "risk" and "compliance" committees. We find that breached firms are also more likely to report the existence of a board-level technology committee (3.2% vs. 0.7%; p-value<0.01). Among the propensity score match sample, we also find breach firms are larger, less likely to report a loss, more likely to report a prior breach, more likely to have a compliance committee, and marginally more likely to report the existence of a technology committee (17.1% vs. 9.2%, p-value=0.09)

#### <<< Insert Table 1 Here >>>

Table 2 reports the Pearson correlation matrix for the variables used in our estimation of equation 1. As predicted, there are significant, positive correlations between *BREACH* and *SIZE*, *R&D*, and *PAST\_BREACH*, and a significantly negative correlation between *BREACH* and *LOSS*. Regarding RQ1, we report a significantly positive correlation between *BREACH* and *TECH\_COMMITTEE*. Collectively, the descriptive analyses reported in Tables 1 and 2 provide univariate evidence that firms with technology committees report more breaches than the number of breaches reported by firms without technology committees.

#### <<< Insert Table 2 Here >>>

Panel A, Table 3 reports the multivariate analysis of RQ1 using the propensity score matched sample of firms with the first column reporting coefficient estimates for equation 1, and the second column reporting coefficient estimates for equation 4. The multivariate analysis allows us to control for industry fixed effects and year fixed effects, as well as other factors that are likely to influence breaches. The variables that we include in these models provide us with a 91.9% and 90.3% concordant, which suggests a sufficient level of predictive ability. Regarding our control variables, we estimate positive coefficients for *SIZE, PAST\_BREACH,* and *COMPLIANCE\_COMMITTEE* and a negative coefficient for *LOSS* as predicted. Regarding our variable of interest, in the first column we report a positive coefficient estimate for *TECH\_COMMITTEE* (1.046; p-value < 0.01) for equation 1, suggesting multivariate support for our univariate findings that firms with technology committees are more likely to report breaches.

preprint accepted manuscript In the second column, we examine whether more established technology committees are differentially associated with reported breaches, by adding an additional variable that identifies firms with technology committees that have been in existence for periods longer than the median aged technology committee. We continue to estimate a positive coefficient on TECH\_COMMITEE (1.618; p-value <0.01) in equation 4, and we also estimate a marginally significant negative coefficient estimate on OLD\_TECH\_COMMITTEE (-2.180; p-value=0.08). This latter finding provides some evidence that more established technology committees appear to mitigate the association between technology committees and breaches. In panel B, we report an insignificant F-test for the sum of *TECH\_COMMITTEE* and *OLD\_TECH\_COMMITTEE (*ß8+ ß9*=* -0.374, p-value=0.58, suggesting that the positive association between technology committees and reported breaches appears to be limited to the younger technology committees.

#### <<< Insert Table 3 Here >>>

preprint Table 4 reports the multivariate analysis of RQ1 using the Heckman (1979) two stage approach to address endogeneity, with the first column reporting coefficient estimates for equation 3 and the second column reporting coefficient estimates for equation 5. Our models continue to provide a sufficient level of predictive ability at 88.0%. With the larger sample, we estimate positive coefficients for *SIZE, R&D, LEVERAGE, PAST\_BREACH, RISK\_COMMITTEE* and *COMPLIANCE\_COMMITTEE* and a negative coefficient for *LOSS* as predicted. Regarding our variable of interest, and consistent with the results reported in Table 3, we report a positive coefficient estimate for *TECH\_COMMITTEE* for equation 3 (0.703; p-value < 0.01) and equation 5 (1.303; p-value<0.01). Further, we continue to estimate a negative coefficient estimate *OLD\_TECH\_COMMITTEE* (-1.564; p-value < 0.01), and an insignificant Ftest on the sum of *TECH\_COMMITTEE* and *OLD\_TECH\_COMMITTEE (*ß8+ ß9*=* -0.261, pvalue=0.61)*.* 

### accepted <<< Insert Table 4 Here >>>

manuscript Collectively, we interpret the findings reported in Table 3 and Table 4 as robust evidence consistent with the positive association between the formation of a technology committee and the likelihood of reporting a breach, and evidence that this association appears to decrease over time.

#### **Sensitivity Analysis for RQ1**

It is possible that the risk of breach represents a correlated omitted variable in our analysis to the extent that firms with a greater risk of breach form technology committees. We perform additional analyses to improve the strength of our inference that the presence of a technology committee is the dominant factor in the increased reporting of breaches. Specifically, we use the predicted value from equation 1 (without *TECH\_COMMITTEE*) for each observation

to obtain a probability of reported breach. We then examine whether the probability of breach is positively correlated with the presence of a technology committee. Among our full sample (n=49,924), we observe a small, but significant, correlation (0.037, p-value<0.01). However, among our propensity score matched sample (n=3,575), the correlation becomes insignificant (- 0.0008, p-value=0.964). This suggests that our matching procedure, while designed to match similar firms with (without) technology committees, also appears to provide us with a sample of firms with similar breach risks. We suggest that the small correlation in our full sample, in conjunction with our insignificant correlation among our propensity score matched sample, help to strengthen our RQ1 inferences.

preprint accepted manuscript To provide even more evidence that breach risk is not driving our results, we perform an additional propensity score matching technique where we identify firms that report breaches and match them with firms that do not report breaches, but are within three percent caliper distance in the probability of reporting a breach. Consistent with our tabulated analysis, among this matched sample of firms with similar risks of reporting breaches, we continue to estimate a positive and significant coefficient (0.911, p-value=0.03) for *TECH\_COMMITTEE* in our estimation of equation 1. We also continue to estimate a positive and significant coefficient (1.147, p-value<0.01) for *TECH\_COMMITTEE* and negative and significant coefficient (-1.334, p-value=0.03) for *OLD\_TECH\_COMMITTEE* in our estimation of equation 4.

In developing RQ1, we argue that the technology committee can potentially influence reported breaches in multiple ways. One is that a technology committee would presumably be actively engaged in oversight, which implies IT-related controls would be strong and that ITrisks, including security breaches, would be mitigated. Alternatively, firms with robust monitoring systems, a likely result of engaged oversight bodies, could have more reported

breaches due to an enhanced ability to detect breaches when they occur. Further, we explore whether the detection/disclosure role of technology committees could differ depending on whether the source of the breach was external or internal.

preprint accepted manuscript We report the results from this analysis in Table 5. We use the privacyrights.orgidentified breach type to sort breaches into external and internal sources, and then separately estimate equation 3 with the dependent variable modified to denote external breaches (*EXTERNAL\_BREACH =1,* Column 1) and internal breaches (*INTERNAL\_BREACH= 1,*  Column 2).12 We find that the presence of technology committees is associated with a higher likelihood of *external* breaches (1.158, p-value < 0.01), but not *internal* breaches (0.050, p-value = 0.93). Interestingly, we find that the presence of "risk" and "compliance" committees explain the likelihood of *internal* breaches (*RISK\_COMMITTEE* = 0.684, p-value = 0.01; *COMPLIANCE\_COMMITTEE* = 0.746; p-value < 0.01), but not *external* breaches (*RISK\_COMMITTEE* = 0.400, p-value = 0.18; *COMPLIANCE\_COMMITTEE* = -0.065, p-value = 0.91). We interpret these results as evidence that technology committees appear to serve a distinct role on the board relative to other committees with respect to reported breaches. After finding that technology committees appear to be only associated with the reporting of *external* breaches, we next estimate equation 5 on these breaches to examine whether the incrementally negative association between older technology committees and reported breaches continues to hold among only external breaches. Similar to the findings reported in Tables 3 and 4, we continue to estimate a negative coefficient on *OLD\_TECH\_COMMITTEE* (-1.103; p-value =

<sup>12</sup> As previously mentioned, we conduct this sensitivity analysis using the full sample because the propensity score match sample did not provide us with a sufficient number of breaches to be able to further split them into breach type.

0.03), and an insignificant coefficient estimate on the sum of *TECH\_COMMITTEE* and *OLD\_TECH\_COMMITTEE (*ß8+ ß9*=* 0.506, p-value=0.35) among external breaches.

#### <<< Insert Table 5 Here >>>

preprint In summary, the findings of our breach determinant sensitivity analysis provide more robust support for our inference that the presence of a technology committee increases the likelihood of reporting a breach. Further, the presence of a technology committee appears to be primarily associated with external breaches, implying that firms that have board-level "technology" committees have a higher likelihood of reporting an external breaches. In addition, the positive association between technology committees and reported breaches in conjunction with the negative association between older technology committees and reported breaches, suggests that the increase in reported breaches appears to be driven by the recently formed technology committees and that technology committees may become more effective at deterring breaches over time.

#### **Returns Analysis for Testing RQ2**

## accepted manuscript The purpose of RQ2 is to examine how the capital market reacts to reported breaches for firms with a technology committee. We also investigate whether there is a differential reaction based on the nature of the breach (external versus internal) and or the age of the technology committee at the time of the breach. To conduct the analysis, we use Eventus to examine the market model value weighted cumulative abnormal return in the three day window surrounding the disclosure of the breach per privacyrights.org (CARt-1 to t+1, referred to as CAR hereafter).13

<sup>13</sup> We conducted additional sensitivity tests to examine robustness of both our returns measure as well as the event window. In addition to our tabulated results, we also examined (1) value weighted market-model adjusted abnormal returns, (2) equal weighted market-model abnormal return, and (3) equal weighted market-model adjusted abnormal returns. We find that the results reported in Table 6 are robust to these alternative returns measures. To test the robustness of our event window, we also examine the five day period around the disclosure (-2 to +2), the day of the

We identify 390 breach disclosures involving publicly-traded firms with non-missing data in Eventus, and report our descriptive results in Table 6. We report an average breach announcement CAR of 0.44%, consistent with prior research. We further report that 4.4% (2.6%) [7.7%] of our breach observations report the presence of a technology (compliance) [risk] committee, similar to that reported in Table 1. Consistent with expectations, we report a negative correlation between *CAR* and *EXTERNAL\_BREACH,* suggesting that the market reacts more negatively to breaches that originate from sources external to the company.

#### <<< Insert Table 6 Here >>>

preprint accepted manuscript Table 7, Panel A reports the regression estimation of equation (3) and Panel B reports Ftests comparing coefficient estimates. We observe a negative coefficient estimate for *EXTERNAL\_BREACH* (-0.616, p-value = 0.03), suggesting an incrementally more negative response to external breaches relative to internal breaches. In the model where we interact EXTERNAL\_BREACH with TECH\_COMMITTEE, we continue to observe a negative coefficient estimate on EXTERNAL\_BREACH (-0.655, p-value = 0.03) as well as a marginally significant positive coefficient estimate on the interaction of *EXTERNAL\_BREACH*\**TECH\_COMMITTEE* (1.070, p-value = 0.08), consistent with the market reacting less negatively to the "bad news" provided by external breach disclosures when the firm has a technology committee. We further report an insignificant coefficient on *TECH\_COMMITTEE*, the main technology committee variable (-0.819, p-value = 0.61), which captures the impact of internal breaches on returns among firms with technology committees.

disclosure (0), and the day of the disclosure and the day following the disclosure (0 to +1). We find results consistent with Table 6 for (-2 to +2), but are unable to find results using (0) or (0 to +1), consistent with some information leakage prior to the official report date.

This insignificant main effect finding is also consistent with our RQ1 finding that technology committees do not appear to be associated with internal breaches.

#### <<< Insert Table 7 Here >>>

preprint accepted In Table 7, Panel B, we report the results from an F-test revealing that the negative incremental impact of an external breach is completely nullified by the presence of a technology committee (ß4+ß5=0, p-value =0.80). Collectively, the analysis reported in Table 7 suggests that firms with technology committees do not experience the incremental negative returns that firms without a technology committee experience when an external breach is announced. These findings help explain RQ2 and indicate that a positive signal is provided by firms that have a technology committee. We conjecture that this positive signal is caused by a market-perceived acceptance of technology committees as an effective ITG mechanism. We do not find evidence that older technology committees experience significantly different returns around the breach announcement (0.386, p-value = 0.59), suggesting that the market does not appear to react differently for breaches among more mature technology committees.

# manuscript

#### **V. CONCLUSIONS**

Security breaches are costly to firms and the cost continues to increase. Firms are increasingly recognizing this phenomenon and considering governance mechanisms in response. Our study considers one governance mechanism, a board-level technology committee, and examines the relationship between board-level technology committees and reported breaches.

The COBIT Framework (most recently, COBIT 5 [ISACA 2013a] and the related security guide [2013b]) and the ITG literature indicate that as IT increases in importance, firms should expand the role of the board to ensure adequate oversight. We propose that establishment of a specialized board committee, specifically a technology committee, is an effective response to breach risk. We incorporate signaling theory to investigate the argument that a technology committee informs the market about a firm's breach risk and ability to mitigate that risk. Establishing a technology committee requires board-level expertise, at additional cost, a necessary element of a signal.

preprint accepted Using data from the intersection of privacyrights.org and *COMPUSTAT*, we find robust evidence that firms with technology committees are more likely to be associated with reported breaches. Additional results indicate that breaches are also more likely for firms with risk and compliance committees. In trying to understand why firms may elect various committees to respond to different risks, we find that external breaches are more likely for firms with boardlevel technology committees, while internal breaches are more likely for firms with risk and compliance committees. We further find that firms with more established technology committees are not more likely to be breached than firms without technology committees. This result implies that the initial increase in reported breaches is mitigated as the technology committee matures.

manuscript We use Eventus to examine the three day value weighted abnormal returns surrounding the disclosure of the breach to examine whether the market appears to differentially react to the "bad news" surrounding a breach disclosure of firms with technology committees relative to those without such committees. We find that while external breach disclosures are accompanied by a negative return for firms without technology committees, firms with technology committees in place at the time the breach is disclosed do not experience significantly lower negative returns. Further, the magnitude of the return is not influenced by the age of the technology committee. Our interpretation is that the market views the existence of a technology committee as a mitigating factor in the severity of the "bad news" of the external breach disclosure. In

conjunction with the breach determinant finding, our results provide initial evidence that forming a technology committee may be an effective governance mechanism for mitigating costs associated with security breaches.

An important limitation of this study is that our data source of reported breaches, privacyrights.org, does not include the entire population of breaches. Although Gwebu et al. (2013) use the same information source and report that most states have required that breaches be reported starting in 2005, the laws are not uniform and are generally limited due to reporting issues where the information of third parties is compromised. In addition, while firms must report material information to shareholders on Form 8-K, the SEC has given management latitude not to include breaches if they are deemed immaterial.

preprint accepted manuscript Our results add to the extant ITG, disclosure, and signaling literatures and have implications for both academics and firms. The decision to invest in costly ITG structures involves a cost-benefit analysis of preventing and detecting potential breaches. Signaling theory indicates that firms can signal private information, in this case the ability to respond to breach risk, by incurring costs that firms that do not signal are either unwilling or unable to incur. A signal that we explored is the formation of a board-level technology committee to indicate robust governance processes for a particular IT risk. Our finding that breached firms with technology committees do not have the negative market returns observed for breached firms with technology committees suggests that for firms in our study, the board-level technology committee was an effective signal. Thus, firms with breach risk may consider board-level governance strategies, such as forming a technology committee, as a way of signaling the priority board-level oversight of breach risk. Our findings suggest that disclosure of breaches do not necessarily hurt firm value if the firm is positioned to manage the risk as is the case when a specialized board committee is

formed. Future research should explore other signals representing oversight of IT risk that firms can send such as ISO IT risk certification; appointment of board-level IT specialists; the salary of the Chief Information Officer; and the reporting structure of the Chief Information Officer.

Identification of IT expertise is an important next step in evaluating the capability of the board to exercise IT risk oversight regardless of whether the risk is managed by individual committees or the entire board. Regulators and researchers can play prominent roles in identifying characteristics of board members with IT expertise.

preprint

accepted manuscript

#### **REFERENCES**

- Abbott, L. J., S. Parker, and G. F. Peters. 2004. Audit committee characteristics and restatements. *Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory* 23 (1): 69-87.
- Adler, T. 2011. *Building Protection from Payments Fraud*. Financial Executives Institute: Morristown, NJ.
- Bart, C., and O. Turel. 2010. IT and the board of directors: An empirical investigation into the "governance questions" Canadian Board members ask about IT. *Journal of Information Systems* 24 (2): 147-172.
- Beaver, W. 1968. The information content of annual earnings announcements. *Journal of Accounting Research* 6: 67-92.
- Bhattacharya, S. 1979. Imperfect information, dividend policy, and 'the bird in the hand' fallacy. *Bell Journal of Economics* 10: 259–270.
- Campbell, K., L. Gordon, M. Loeb, and L. Zhou. 2003. The economic cost of publicly announced information security breaches: Empirical evidence from the stock market. *Journal of Computer Security* 11: 431-448.
- Carcello, J. V., and T. L. Neal. 2003. Audit committee characteristics and auditor dismissals following "new" going-concern reports. *The Accounting Review* 78 (1): 95-117.
- preprint Card, D. 2011. Cybersecurity & corporate governance: SEC releases first-ever guidance on cybersecurity risks disclosure. Accessed online on November 30, 2011 from www.bennettjones.com.
- accepted manuscript Cavusoglu, H., B. Mishra, and S. Raghunathan. 2004. The effect of Internet security breach announcements on market value: capital market reactions for breached firms and Internet security developers. *International Journal of Electronic Commerce* 9: 69-104.
- Chai, S., M. Kim, and H. R. Rao. 2011. Firms' information security investment decisions: Stock market evidence of investors' behavior. *Decision Support Systems* 50 (4): 651-661.
- Congressional Research Service. 2012. *Data Security Breach Notification Laws*. http://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R42475.pdf.
- Debreceny, R. 2013. Research on IT governance, risk, and value: Challenges and opportunities. *Journal of Information Systems* (27) 1: 129-135.
- Defond, M.L., R.N. Hann, and X. Hu. 2005. Does the market value financial expertise on audit committees of boards of directors? *Journal of Accounting Research* 43(2): 153-193.
- Dehejia, R. and S. Wahba. 2002. Propensity score-matching methods for nonexperimental causal studies. *The Review of Economics and Statistics* 84 (1): 151-161.

- DiPietro, B. 2013. Cybercrime 2014: More attacks, more boardroom scrutiny. *Wall Street Journal Blog*. Accessed online December 6, 2013 at http://stream.wsj.com/story/latestheadlines/SS-2-63399/SS-2-396323/
- Easton, P. D., and M. E. Zmijewski. 1989. Cross-sectional variation in the stock market response to accounting earnings announcements. *Journal of Accounting and Economics* 11 (2): 117-141.
- Ettredge, M., and V. Richardson. 2001. Assessing the risk in e-commerce. *ICIS 2001 Proceedings*, 31.
- Feng, M., C. Li, and S. McVay. 2009. Internal control and management guidance. *Journal of Accounting and Economics* 48: 190-209.
- Firth, M., and C. K. Liau Tan. 1998. Auditor quality, signaling, and the valuation of initial public offerings. *Journal of Business Finance & Accounting* 25 (1-2): 145-165.
- Goel, S., and H. Shawkey. 2009. Estimating the market impact of security breach announcements on firm values. *Information & Management* 47 (7): 404-410.
- Gordon, J.N. 2007. The rise of independent directors in the United States, 1950-2005: Of shareholder value and stock market prices. *Stanford Law Review* 59 (6): 1465-1568.
- preprint Gordon, L. A., M. P. Loeb, and T. Sohail. 2010. Market value of voluntary disclosures concerning information security. *MIS Quarterly* 34 (3): 567-594.
- Gwebu, K., J. Wang, and L. Wang. 2013. Data security breach impact and disclosure. Working paper presented at the American Accounting Association Annual Meeting, Anaheim, CA.
- accepted manuscript Haviland, A., D. Nagin, and P. Rosenbaum. 2007. Combing propensity score matching and group-based trajectory analysis in an observational study. *Psychological Methods* 12 (3): 247-267.
- HBGary, Inc. 2013. Cybersecurity directly affects investor attitudes, new HBGary survey finds. February 25. Accessed online December 6, 2013 at https://hbgary.com/article/cybersecurity\_directly\_affects\_investor\_attitudes\_new\_hbgary \_survey\_finds\_survey\_reveals
- Heckman, J. J. 1979. Sample selection bias as a specification error. *Econometrica* 47 (February): 153-162.
- ISACA. 2011. *Global Status Report on the Governance of Enterprise IT (GEIT)*. Rolling Meadows, IL: ISACA.
- --------- 2013a. *COBIT 5: A Business Framework for the Governance and Management of Enterprise IT*. Rolling Meadows, IL: ISACA.
- ---------. 2013b. *COBIT for Information Security*. Rolling Meadows, IL: ISACA.

- International Organization for Standardization/International Electrotechnical Commission (ISO/IEC). 2008. *ISO/IEC 38500: Corporate Governance of Information Technology*. Geneva, Switzerland: International Organization for Standardization/International Electrotechnical Commission.
- John, K., and J. Williams. 1985. Dividends, dilution, and taxes: A signaling equilibrium. *The Journal of Finance* 40 (4): 1053-1070.
- Kannan, K., J. Rees, and S. Sridhar. 2007. Market reactions to information security breach announcements: An empirical analysis. *International Journal of Electronic Commerce* 12 (1): 69-91.
- Krebs on Security. 2015. Accessed online March 13, 2015 at http://www.krebsonsecurity.com/
- Kroll. 2013. Kroll releases its 2014 cybersecurity forecast. Accessed online December 6, 2013 at http://www.4-traders.com/news/Kroll-Releases-Its-2014-Cyber-Security-Forecast-- 17575611/
- Kwon, J., J. R. Ulmer, and T. Wang. 2013. The association between top management involvement and compensation and information security breaches. *Journal of Information Systems* 27 (1): 219-236.
- preprint Lawrence, A., M. Minutti-Meza, and P. Zhang. 2011. Can big 4 versus non-big 4 differences in audit quality proxies be attributed to client characteristics? *The Accounting Review* 86 (1): 259–286.
- accepted Leland, H. E., and D. H. Pyle. 1977. Informational asymmetries, financial structure, and financial intermediation. *The Journal of Finance* 32 (2): 371-387.
- manuscript Lennox, C., J. Francis, and Z. Wang. 2012. Selection models in accounting research. *The Accounting Review* 87 (2): 589-616.
- Masli, A., V. J. Richardson, J. M. Sanchez, and R. E. Smith. 2011. The business value of IT: A synthesis and framework of archival research. *Journal of Information Systems* (25) 2: 81- 116.
- Miller, M. H., and K. Rock. 1985. Dividend policy under asymmetric information. *Journal of Finance* 40:1031–1051.
- National Association of Corporate Directors. 2014. Cyber-risk Oversight Handbook.
- National Conference of State Legislature. 2015. http://www.ncsl.org/research/telecommunications-and-information-technology/securitybreach-notification-laws.aspx. Last accessed March 20, 2015.

- New York Stock Exchange. 2014. Policy Manual. Available at: http://nysemanual.nyse.com/lcm/Help/mapContent.asp?sec=lcm-sections&title=sxruling-nyse-policymanual\_303A.05&id=chp\_1\_4\_3\_8).
- Ponemon Institute. 2013. Cost of Cyber Crime: United States. http://www.ponemon.org/local/upload/file/2012\_US\_Cost\_of\_Cyber\_Crime\_Study\_FIN AL6%20.pdf. Last accessed January 3, 2014.
- Ponemon Institute. 2014. 2014 Cost of Data Breach Study: Global Analysis. http://www-935.ibm.com/services/us/en/it-services/security-services/cost-of-data-breach/. Last accessed September 30, 2014.
- Premuroso, R. F., and S. Bhattacharya. 2007. Is there a relationship between firm performance, corporate governance, and a firm's decision to form a technology committee? *Corporate Governance: An International Review* 15 (6): 1260-1276.
- Securities and Exchange Commission. 2011. *CF Disclosure Guidance: Topic No. 2*: *Cybersecurity*. Published October 13, 2011.
- Spence, M. 1973. Job market signaling. *The Quarterly Journal of Economics*: 355-374.
- Spencer Stuart US Board Index. 2012. http://content.spencerstuart.com/sswebsite/pdf/lib/Spencer-Stuart-US-Board-Index-2012\_06Nov2012.pdf. Last accessed January 6, 2014.
- preprint Srinivasan, S. 2005. Consequences of financial reporting failure for outside directors: Evidence from accounting restatements and audit committee members. *Journal of Accounting Research* 43 (2): 291-334.
- accepted manuscript Strohm, C. 2013. Cyber attacks abound yet companies tell SEC losses are few. *Bloomberg*. April 3: 3 pages.
- Tambe, P., and L. M. Hitt. 2012. The productivity of information technology investments: New evidence from IT labor data. *Information Systems Research* 23 (3): 599-617.
- Thomson Reuters. 2014. Senate Intelligence Committee approves cybersecurity bill (July 8): 2 pages.
- Tysiac, K. 2014. Technology plays a role in board members' top two concerns. http://www.cgma.org/Magazine/News/Pages/201410602.aspx. Last accessed: July 24, 2014.
- Wang, T., K. N. Kannan, and J. R. Ulmer. 2013. The association between the disclosure and the realization of information security risk factors. *Information Systems Research* 24 (2): 201-218.
- Yadron, D. 2014. Corporate boards race to shore up cybersecurity: Directors grapple with issues once consigned to teach experts. *The Wall Street Journal* (June 29): 3 pages.

|  | Table 1: Descriptive Statistics – RQ1       |
|--|---------------------------------------------|
|  | Panel A: Full Sample Descriptive statistics |

| (n=49,924)           | Mean  | Q1    | Median | Q3    | Std Dev |
|----------------------|-------|-------|--------|-------|---------|
| BREACH               | 0.006 | 0.000 | 0.000  | 0.000 | 0.075   |
| EXTERNAL_BREACH      | 0.003 | 0.000 | 0.000  | 0.000 | 0.056   |
| INTERNAL_BREACH      | 0.003 | 0.000 | 0.000  | 0.000 | 0.050   |
| SIZE                 | 5.920 | 4.138 | 6.023  | 7.683 | 2.650   |
| R&D                  | 0.937 | 0.000 | 0.000  | 1.329 | 1.705   |
| LEVERAGE             | 0.263 | 0.000 | 0.084  | 0.267 | 7.960   |
| LOSS                 | 0.377 | 0.000 | 0.000  | 1.000 | 0.485   |
| PAST_BREACH          | 0.016 | 0.000 | 0.000  | 0.000 | 0.125   |
| RISK_COMMITTEE       | 0.013 | 0.000 | 0.000  | 0.000 | 0.113   |
| COMPLIANCE_COMMITTEE | 0.010 | 0.000 | 0.000  | 0.000 | 0.101   |
| TECH_COMMITTEE       | 0.007 | 0.000 | 0.000  | 0.000 | 0.084   |

#### **Panel B: TECH\_COMMITTEE=0 vs. TECH\_COMMITTEE=1**

|                      | Full<br>Sample           | Propensity Match<br>Sample |  |
|----------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|--|
| TECH_COMMITTEE=0     | (n=49,569)               | (n=2,977)                  |  |
|                      | Mean                     | Mean                       |  |
| BREACH               | 0.005<br>***             | 0.010                      |  |
| EXTERNAL_BREACH      | 0.003<br>***             | 0.005<br>*                 |  |
| INTERNAL_BREACH      | 0.003                    | 0.005                      |  |
| SIZE                 | preprint<br>5.906<br>*** | 6.210<br>***               |  |
| R&D                  | 0.916<br>***             | 1.581<br>***               |  |
| LEVERAGE             | 0.264<br>*               | 0.207                      |  |
| LOSS                 | 0.378<br>***             | 0.360<br>***               |  |
| PAST_BREACH          | accepted<br>0.015<br>*** | 0.046                      |  |
| RISK_COMMITTEE       | 0.013<br>***             | 0.011                      |  |
| COMPLIANCE_COMMITTEE | 0.010<br>***             | manuscript<br>0.031<br>**  |  |
| TECH_COMMITTEE=1     | (n=355)                  | (n=303)                    |  |
|                      | Mean                     | Mean                       |  |
| BREACH               | 0.025                    | 0.020                      |  |
| EXTERNAL_BREACH      | 0.020                    | 0.017                      |  |
| INTERNAL_BREACH      | 0.006                    | 0.003                      |  |
| SIZE                 | 7.897                    | 7.742                      |  |
| R&D                  | 3.767                    | 4.075                      |  |
| LEVERAGE             | 0.200                    | 0.207                      |  |
| LOSS                 | 0.180                    | 0.198                      |  |
| PAST_BREACH          | 0.076                    | 0.066                      |  |
| RISK_COMMITTEE       | 0.045                    | 0.017                      |  |
| COMPLIANCE_COMMITTEE | 0.059                    | 0.063                      |  |

\* / \*\* / \*\*\* Difference between the TECH\_COMMITTEE=0 observations and the TECH\_COMMITTEE=1 is significant at the 0.10 / 0.05 / 0.01 level for the t-test of means.

| BREACH=0             | Full<br>Sample<br>(n=49,643) | Propensity Match<br>Sample<br>(n=3,245) |  |
|----------------------|------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|--|
|                      | Mean                         | Mean                                    |  |
| SIZE                 | 5.898<br>***                 | 6.315<br>***                            |  |
| R&D                  | 0.932<br>***                 | 1.801                                   |  |
| LEVERAGE             | 0.263                        | 0.207                                   |  |
| LOSS                 | 0.378<br>***                 | 0.348<br>***                            |  |
| PAST_BREACH          | 0.014<br>***                 | 0.043<br>***                            |  |
| RISK_COMMITTEE       | 0.012<br>***                 | 0.011                                   |  |
| COMPLIANCE_COMMITTEE | 0.010<br>***                 | 0.032<br>***                            |  |
| TECH_COMMITTEE       | 0.007<br>***                 | 0.092<br>*                              |  |
| BREACH=1             | (n=281)                      | (n=35)                                  |  |
|                      | Mean                         | Mean                                    |  |
| SIZE                 | 9.865                        | 9.734                                   |  |
| R&D                  | 1.732                        | 2.740                                   |  |
| LEVERAGE             | 0.224                        | 0.256                                   |  |
| LOSS                 | 0.103                        | 0.086                                   |  |
| PAST_BREACH          | 0.345                        | 0.486                                   |  |
| RISK_COMMITTEE       | 0.100                        | 0.029                                   |  |
| COMPLIANCE_COMMITTEE | preprint<br>0.050            | 0.200                                   |  |
| TECH_COMMITTEE       | 0.032                        | 0.171                                   |  |

| Table 1: Descriptive Statistics – RQ1, continued |
|--------------------------------------------------|
| Panel C: BREACH=0 vs. BREACH=1                   |

accepted \* / \*\* / \*\*\* Difference between the BREACH=0 observations and the BREACH=1 is significant at the 0.10 / 0.05 / 0.01 level for the t-test of means.

manuscript *BREACH* is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm has a reported breach in the current fiscal year, or zero otherwise; *EXTERNAL\_BREACH* is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the breach was identified as either "HACK", "PORT (portable device theft)", or "STAT (stationary [i.e. server] theft)" or zero otherwise; *INTERNAL\_BREACH* is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the breach was identified as "DISC (unintended disclosure);" "PHYS (physical loss);" "INSD (insiders);" "CARD (payment card fraud);" and "UNKN (unknown)."or zero otherwise*; SIZE* is the log of total assets at the beginning of the fiscal year; *R&D* is the log of the current fiscal year R&D expense; *LEVERAGE* is the ratio of total liabilities divided by total assets at the beginning of the fiscal year; *LOSS* is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm reported negative net income in the current year, or zero otherwise; *PAST\_BREACH* is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm had a reported breach on privacyrights.org in a past fiscal period starting with 2005, or zero otherwise; *RISK\_COMMITTEE* is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm discloses the presence of a board-level committee with the word "Risk" in the title in the proxy statement released prior to the date of the breach; *COMPLIANCE\_COMMITTEE* is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm discloses the presence of a boardlevel committee with the word "Compliance" in the title in the proxy statement released prior to the date of the breach; and *TECH\_COMMITTEE* is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm discloses the presence of a board-level committee with the word "Technology" in the title in the proxy statement released prior to the date of the breach.

| ia<br>b<br>le<br>(<br>)<br>Va<br>4<br>9,<br>9<br>2<br>4<br>r<br>n=                                 | 2.                | 3.                | 4.                | 5.                | 6.                | 7.                | 8.                | 9.                |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
| 1.<br>B<br>R<br>E<br>A<br>C<br>H                                                                   | 0.<br>1<br>1<br>2 | 0.<br>0<br>3<br>5 | -0<br>0<br>0<br>0 | -0<br>0<br>4<br>2 | 0.<br>1<br>9<br>9 | 0.<br>0<br>5<br>8 | 0.<br>0<br>3<br>0 | 0.<br>0<br>2<br>2 |
| 2.<br>S<br>I<br>Z<br>E                                                                             |                   | 0.<br>1<br>7<br>3 | -0<br>0<br>2<br>0 | -0<br>4<br>4<br>1 | 0.<br>1<br>8<br>0 | 0.<br>1<br>5<br>2 | 0.<br>0<br>7<br>5 | 0.<br>0<br>6<br>3 |
| 3.<br>R<br>&<br>D                                                                                  |                   |                   | -0<br>0<br>0<br>7 | 0.<br>0<br>0<br>4 | 0.<br>0<br>5<br>5 | -0<br>0<br>3<br>9 | -0<br>0<br>0<br>4 | 0.<br>1<br>4<br>0 |
| 4.<br>L<br>E<br>V<br>E<br>R<br>A<br>G<br>E                                                         |                   |                   |                   | 0.<br>0<br>1<br>3 | 0.<br>0<br>0<br>0 | -0<br>0<br>0<br>2 | -0<br>0<br>0<br>0 | -0<br>0<br>0<br>0 |
| 5.<br>L<br>O<br>S<br>S                                                                             |                   |                   |                   |                   | -0<br>0<br>5<br>7 | -0<br>0<br>4<br>7 | -0<br>0<br>2<br>7 | -0<br>0<br>3<br>4 |
| 6.<br>P<br>A<br>S<br>T_<br>B<br>R<br>E<br>A<br>C<br>H                                              |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   | 0.<br>0<br>8<br>4 | 0.<br>0<br>5<br>7 | 0.<br>0<br>4<br>1 |
| 7.<br>R<br>I<br>S<br>K_<br>C<br>O<br>M<br>M<br>I<br>T<br>T<br>E<br>E                               |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   | 0.<br>0<br>8<br>7 | 0.<br>0<br>2<br>4 |
| 8.<br>C<br>O<br>M<br>P<br>L<br>I<br>A<br>N<br>C<br>E_<br>C<br>O<br>M<br>M<br>I<br>T<br>T<br>E<br>E |                   | p                 | r<br>e<br>p       | i<br>r<br>n       | t                 |                   |                   | 0.<br>0<br>4<br>1 |
| 9.<br>T<br>E<br>C<br>H_<br>C<br>O<br>M<br>M<br>I<br>T<br>T<br>E<br>E                               |                   | a                 | c<br>c            | t<br>e<br>p       | d<br>e            |                   |                   |                   |
|                                                                                                    |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |

Table 2: Correlation Matrix – RQ1

manuscript The Pearson correlation coefficients are presented with the significant correlations in bold (p-value<0.05).

All variables are defined in Table 1.

Table 3: Breach Determinant Analysis using Propensity Score Match Approach – RQ1 (n=3,575)

Column 1:

Prob (*BREACH* = 1) = F[ß0 + ß1(*SIZE*) + ß2(*R&D*) + ß3(*LEVERAGE*) + ß4(*LOSS*) + ß5(*PAST\_BREACH*) + ß6(*RISK\_COMMITTEE*) + ß7(*COMPLIANCE\_COMMITTEE*) + ß8(*TECH\_COMMITTEE*) + ] (1)

Column 2:

Prob (*BREACH* = 1) = F[ß0 + ß1(*SIZE*) + ß2(*R&D*) + ß3(*LEVERAGE*) + ß4(*LOSS*) + ß5(*PAST\_BREACH*) + ß6(*RISK\_COMMITTEE*) + ß7(*COMPLIANCE\_COMMITTEE*) + ß8(*TECH\_COMMITTEE*) + ß9(*OLD\_TECH\_COMMITTEE*) + ] (4)

| PANEL A: REGRESSION<br>ESTIMATION | Prediction | Column 1              | Column 2     |
|-----------------------------------|------------|-----------------------|--------------|
| Independent Variables1            |            |                       |              |
| Intercept                         |            | -10.390               | -10.622      |
|                                   |            | (<0.01)               | (<0.01)      |
| SIZE                              | (+)        | 0.657<br>***          | 0.632<br>*** |
|                                   |            | (<0.01)               | (<0.01)      |
| R&D                               | (+)        | -0.022                | -0.119<br>*  |
|                                   |            | (0.67)                | (0.05)       |
| LEVERAGE                          | (+)        | 0.346<br>**           | 0.402        |
|                                   |            | (0.04)                | (<0.01)      |
| LOSS                              | (-)        | -0.136                | -0.007       |
|                                   |            | (0.83)                | (0.99)       |
| PAST_BREACH                       | (+)        | 1.752<br>***          | 1.960<br>*** |
|                                   | preprint   | (<0.01)               | (<0.01)      |
| RISK_COMMITTEE                    | (+)        | 0.804                 | 0.744        |
|                                   |            | (0.15)                | (0.19)       |
| COMPLIANCE_COMMITTEE              | (+)        | 0.958<br>**           | 1.112<br>*** |
|                                   |            | accepted<br>(0.02)    | (<0.01)      |
| TECH_COMMITTEE                    | RQ1: (+/-) | 1.046<br>***          | 1.618<br>*** |
|                                   |            | manuscript<br>(<0.01) | (<0.01)      |
| OLD_TECH_COMMITTEE                |            |                       | -2.180<br>*  |
|                                   |            |                       | (0.08)       |
|                                   |            |                       |              |
| Industry Fixed Effects            |            | Yes                   | Yes          |
| Year Fixed Effects                |            | Yes                   | Yes          |
| % Concordant                      |            | 91.9%                 | 90.3%        |
| PANEL B: F-TESTS                  |            |                       |              |
| Comparison of coefficients        |            | p-value               | p-value      |
| ß8 + ß9 = 0                       |            |                       | (0.58)       |

\*\*\*, \*\*, \* represent significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 level, based on two-tailed p-values (one-tail where predicted), where standard errors are estimated after clustering by firm. <sup>1</sup>

 F is the cumulative logistic normal distribution function, *OLD\_TECH\_COMMITTEE* is an indicator variable equal to one if the technology committee is older than the median age of the existing technology committees, and all other variables are as defined in Table 1.

Table 4: Breach Determinant Analysis using Heckman (1979) approach – RQ1 (n=49,924)

Column 1:

Prob (*BREACH* = 1) = F[ß0 + ß1(*SIZE*) + ß2(*R&D*) + ß3(*LEVERAGE*) + ß4(*LOSS*) + ß5(*PAST\_BREACH*) + ß6(*RISK\_COMMITTEE*) + ß7(*COMPLIANCE\_COMMITTEE*) + ß8(*TECH\_COMMITTEE*) + ß9(*IMR*) + ] (3)

Column 2:

Prob (*BREACH* = 1) = F[ß0 + ß1(*SIZE*) + ß2(*R&D*) + ß3(*LEVERAGE*) + ß4(*LOSS*) + ß5(*PAST\_BREACH*) + ß6(*RISK\_COMMITTEE*) + ß7(*COMPLIANCE\_COMMITTEE*) + ß8(*TECH\_COMMITTEE*) + ß9(*OLD\_TECH\_COMMITTEE*) + ß10(*IMR*) + ] (5)

| PANEL A: REGRESSION<br>ESTIMATION | Prediction |                   | Column 1 |                      | Column 2 |
|-----------------------------------|------------|-------------------|----------|----------------------|----------|
| Independent Variables1            |            |                   |          |                      |          |
| Intercept                         |            | -13.782           |          | -13.758              |          |
|                                   |            | (<0.01)           |          | (<0.01)              |          |
| SIZE                              | (+)        | 0.547             | ***      | 0.546                | ***      |
|                                   |            | (<0.01)           |          | (<0.01)              |          |
| R&D                               | (+)        | 0.090             | **       | 0.092                | ***      |
|                                   |            | (<0.01)           |          | (<0.01)              |          |
| LEVERAGE                          | (+)        | 0.003             | ***      | 0.003                | ***      |
|                                   |            | (<0.01)           |          | (<0.01)              |          |
| LOSS                              | (-)        | -0.400            | **       | -0.402               | **       |
|                                   |            | (0.02)            |          | (0.02)               |          |
| PAST_BREACH                       | (+)        | 1.790             | ***      | 1.798                | ***      |
|                                   |            | (<0.01)           |          | (<0.01)              |          |
| RISK_COMMITTEE                    | (+)        | preprint<br>0.595 | **       | 0.568                | **       |
|                                   |            | (0.01)            |          | (0.02)               |          |
| COMPLIANCE_COMMITTEE              | (+)        | 0.471             | **       | 0.498                | **       |
|                                   |            | (0.03)            |          | (0.03)               |          |
| TECH_COMMITTEE                    | RQ1: (+/-) | accepted<br>0.703 | ***      | 1.303                | ***      |
|                                   |            | (<0.01)           |          | (<0.01)              |          |
| OLD_TECH_COMMITTEE                |            |                   |          | manuscript<br>-1.564 | ***      |
|                                   |            |                   |          | (<0.01)              |          |
| IMR                               | (+/-)      | 1.789             | ***      | 1.768                | ***      |
|                                   |            | (<0.01)           |          | (<0.01)              |          |
|                                   |            |                   |          |                      |          |
| Industry Fixed Effects            |            | Yes               |          | Yes                  |          |
| Year Fixed Effects                |            | Yes               |          | Yes                  |          |
| % Concordant                      |            | 88.0%             |          | 88.0%                |          |
| PANEL B: F-TESTS                  |            |                   |          |                      |          |
| Comparison of coefficients        |            |                   |          | p-value              |          |
|                                   |            |                   |          | (0.61)               |          |
| ß9+ ß10=0                         |            |                   |          |                      |          |

\*\*\*, \*\*, \* represent significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 level, based on two-tailed p-values (one-tail where predicted), where standard errors are estimated after clustering by firm. 1

 F is the cumulative logistic normal distribution function, *IMR* is the inverse mills ratio calculated from our technology committee probit model (see equation 1), and all other the variables are as defined in Table 1.

#### Table 5: Breach Determinant Sensitivity Analysis (n=49,924)

Column 1 and Column 2: Prob (*BREACH* = 1) = F[ß0 + ß1(*SIZE*) + ß2(*R&D*) + ß3(*LEVERAGE*) + ß4(*LOSS*) + ß5(*PAST\_BREACH*) + ß6(*RISK\_COMMITTEE*) + ß7(*COMPLIANCE\_COMMITTEE*) + ß8(*TECH\_COMMITTEE*) + ß9(*IMR*) + ] (3)

Column 3:

Prob (*EXTERNAL\_BREACH* = 1) = F[ß0 + ß1(*SIZE*) + ß2(*R&D*) + ß3(*LEVERAGE*) + ß4(*LOSS*) + ß5(*PAST\_BREACH*) + ß6(*RISK\_COMMITTEE*) + ß7(*COMPLIANCE\_COMMITTEE*) + ß8(*TECH\_COMMITTEE*) + ß9(*OLD\_TECH\_COMMITTEE*) + ß10(*IMR*) + ] (5)

| EXTERNAL_<br>INTERNAL_<br>EXTERNAL_<br>Dependent Variable:<br>BREACH=1<br>BREACH=1<br>BREACH=1<br>Independent Variables1<br>Intercept<br>-14.704<br>-13.137<br>-14.669<br>(<0.01)<br>(<0.01)<br>(<0.01)<br>SIZE<br>(+)<br>0.577<br>***<br>0.505<br>***<br>0.576<br>***<br>(<0.01)<br>(<0.01)<br>(<0.01)<br>R&D<br>(+)<br>0.165<br>***<br>-0.027<br>0.165<br>***<br>(<0.01)<br>(0.67)<br>(<0.01)<br>LEVERAGE<br>(+)<br>0.003<br>**<br>0.003<br>***<br>0.003<br>**<br>(0.02)<br>(<0.01)<br>(0.02)<br>LOSS<br>(-)<br>-0.448<br>**<br>-0.358<br>-0.452<br>**<br>preprint<br>(0.05)<br>(0.11)<br>(0.05)<br>PAST_BREACH<br>(+)<br>1.495<br>***<br>2.091<br>***<br>1.508<br>***<br>(<0.01)<br>(<0.01)<br>(<0.01)<br>RISK_COMMITTEE<br>(+)<br>0.400<br>0.684<br>**<br>0.375<br>accepted<br>(0.18)<br>(0.01)<br>(0.20)<br>COMPLIANCE_COMMITTEE<br>(+)<br>-0.065<br>0.746<br>***<br>-0.040<br>manuscript<br>(0.91)<br>(<0.01)<br>(0.94)<br>TECH_COMMITTEE<br>RQ1: (+/-)<br>1.158<br>***<br>0.050<br>1.609<br>***<br>(<0.01)<br>(0.93)<br>(<0.01)<br>OLD_TECH_COMMITTEE<br>-1.103<br>**<br>(0.03)<br>IMR<br>(+/-)<br>2.499<br>***<br>0.784<br>***<br>2.479<br>***<br>(<0.01)<br>(0.26)<br>(<0.01)<br>Industry Fixed Effects<br>Yes<br>Yes<br>Yes<br>Year Fixed Effects<br>Yes<br>Yes<br>Yes<br>% Concordant<br>84.9%<br>80.4%<br>84.9%<br>PANEL B: F-TESTS<br>Comparison of coefficients<br>p-value<br>p-value<br>p-value | PANEL A: REGRESSION<br>ESTIMATION | Prediction<br>Column 1 |             | Column 2 | Column 3     |  |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|------------------------|-------------|----------|--------------|--|
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | ß8 > ß6                           |                        | (0.08)<br>* | (0.16)   | (0.02)<br>** |  |
| ß8 > ß7<br>(0.04)<br>**<br>(0.14)<br>(<0.01)<br>***                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |
| ß8+ ß9 = 0<br>(0.35)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                   |                        |             |          |              |  |

\*\*\*, \*\*, \* represent significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 level, based on two-tailed p-values (one-tail where predicted), where standard errors are estimated after clustering by firm. 1

 F is the cumulative logistic normal distribution function, and all other the variables are as defined in Tables 1 and 4.

|                                 |        | Table 6: Descriptive Statistics – RQ2 |        |        |         |
|---------------------------------|--------|---------------------------------------|--------|--------|---------|
| PANEL A: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS |        |                                       |        |        |         |
| (n=390)                         | Mean   | Q1                                    | Median | Q3     | Std Dev |
| CAR                             | -0.44% | -1.61%                                | -0.29% | 0.95%  | 2.97%   |
| RISK_COMMITTEE                  | 0.077  | 0.000                                 | 0.000  | 0.000  | 0.267   |
| COMPLIANCE_COMMITTEE            | 0.026  | 0.000                                 | 0.000  | 0.000  | 0.158   |
| TECH_COMMITTEE                  | 0.044  | 0.000                                 | 0.000  | 0.000  | 0.204   |
| PAST_BREACH                     | 0.421  | 0.000                                 | 1.000  | 1.000  | 0.490   |
| EXTERNAL_BREACH                 | 0.536  | 0.000                                 | 1.000  | 1.000  | 0.499   |
|                                 |        |                                       |        |        |         |
| PANEL B: CORRELATION MATRIX     | 2.     | 3.                                    | 4.     | 5.     | 6.      |
| 1. CAR                          | 0.048  | 0.023                                 | 0.005  | 0.084  | -0.099  |
| 2. RISK_COMMITTEE               |        | 0.136                                 | 0.033  | 0.144  | -0.175  |
| 3. COMPLIANCE_COMMITTEE         |        |                                       | -0.035 | -0.040 | -0.077  |
| 4. TECH_COMMITTEE               |        |                                       |        | 0.073  | 0.048   |
| 5. PAST_BREACH                  |        |                                       |        |        | -0.165  |
| 6. EXTERNAL_BREACH              |        | preprint                              |        |        |         |
|                                 |        |                                       |        |        |         |

accepted The Pearson correlation coefficients are presented with the significant correlations in bold (pvalue<0.05).

manuscript *CAR* is the 3 day value weighted market model cumulative abnormal return surrounding the date the breach was reported (per privacyrights.org). All other variables are defined in Table 1.

#### Table 7: Returns Analysis - RQ2

[View publication stats](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/292336459)

CAR(-1,+1) = ß0 + ß1(*RISK\_COMMITTEE*) + ß2(*COMPLIANCE\_COMMITTEE*) + ß3(*TECH\_COMMITTEE*) + ß4(*PAST\_BREACH*) + ß5(*EXTERNAL\_BREACH*) + ß6(*EXTERNAL\_BREACH\*TECH\_COMMITTEE*) + ß7(*IMR*) + (6)

| PANEL A: REGRESSION ESTIMATION |            |              |            |          |    |
|--------------------------------|------------|--------------|------------|----------|----|
| Variables1<br>(n=390)          | Prediction | Estimate     | Prediction | Estimate |    |
|                                |            |              |            |          |    |
| Intercept                      |            | -0.835       |            | -0.818   |    |
|                                |            | (0.05)       |            | (0.09)   |    |
| RISK_COMMITTEE                 | (?)        | 0.172        | (?)        | 0.186    |    |
|                                |            | (0.69)       |            | (0.76)   |    |
| COMPLIANCE_COMMITTEE           | (?)        | 0.210        | (?)        | 0.210    |    |
|                                |            | (0.59)       |            | (0.83)   |    |
| TECH_COMMITTEE                 | (?)        | 0.064        | (?)        | -0.819   |    |
|                                |            | (0.89)       |            | (0.61)   |    |
| PAST_BREACH                    | (?)        | 0.411        | (?)        | 0.407    |    |
|                                |            | (0.16)       |            | (0.20)   |    |
| EXTERNAL_BREACH                | (-)        | -0.616<br>** | (-)        | -0.655   | ** |
|                                |            | (0.03)       |            | (0.03)   |    |
| EXTERNAL_BREACH*TECH_COMMITTEE |            |              | (?)        | 1.070    | *  |
|                                |            |              |            | (0.08)   |    |
| OLD_TECH_COMMITTEE             |            |              | (?)        | 0.386    |    |
|                                |            | preprint     |            | (0.59)   |    |
| IMR                            | (?)        | 0.673        | (?)        | 0.684    |    |
|                                |            | (0.11)       |            | (0.12)   |    |
|                                |            | accepted     |            |          |    |
| R2                             |            | 3.00%        |            | 3.12%    |    |
|                                |            | manuscript   |            |          |    |
| PANEL B: F-TESTS               |            |              |            |          |    |
| Comparison of coefficients     |            |              |            | p-value  |    |
| ß4+ß5=0                        |            |              |            | (0.80)   |    |

\*\*\*, \*\*, \* represent significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 level, based on two-tailed p-values (one-tail where predicted), and are based on heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors. 1 All variables are defined in Tables 1 and 6.