# The Board's Role in Managing Cybersecurity Risks
*By Ray A. Rothrock, James Kaplan, and Friso van der Oord*

## FRONTIERS
### [CORPORATE GOVERNANCE]

Cybersecurity can no longer be the concern of just the IT department. Within organizations, it needs to be everyone’s business — including the board’s.

Today, more than ever, the demands posed by issues of cybersecurity clash with the need for innovation and the claims for productivity. Increasingly, cybersecurity risks include not only the risk of a network data breach or the risk of a cyberattack, but also being undermined by business activities that rely on open digital connectivity and accessibility to a staff. Turning how to deal with cybersecurity risk is of critical importance to an enterprise, and it must therefore be addressed strategically from the boardroom. The boardroom can no longer be a concern delegated to the information technology (IT) department or a need to fix everyone’s business — including the board’s.

### Cybersecurity Enters the Boardroom
Network breaches have become so routine that only the most spectacular events, such as the recent breach of the credit reporting agency Equifax Inc., affecting some 143 million U.S. consumers, make headlines. Corporate boards of directors are expected to ensure cybersecurity, despite the fact that most boards are unprepared for this role. A 2017-2018 survey by the National Association of Corporate Directors (NACD) found that 58% of corporate board member respondents at public companies believe that cybersecurity risk is the most challenging risk they are expected to oversee. The ability of companies to manage this risk has far-reaching implications for stock prices, company reputations, and the professional engagement of directors themselves. For example, following a 2013 data breach of Target Corp., in which the personal information of more than 40 million customers was stolen, a shareholder lawsuit charged directors and officers with having fallen short in their fiduciary duties by failing to maintain adequate controls to ensure the security of data. Although the board members were ultimately not found to be at fault, both the company’s CEO and CFO resigned.

U.S. case law is based on and generally adheres to the “business judgment rule,” which sets a high bar for plaintiffs pursuing legal actions against board members. Similar protections for directors are in place in most “common law” countries, including Canada, England, and Australia. The Equifax cyberattack and former corporate breaches may prompt more challenges to the business judgment rule.

The view that directors are not sufficiently qualified to oversee cybersecurity risk has raised alarm bells in boardrooms nationwide and globally. Even so, companies continue to make cybersecurity a lower-seating issue — and more serious cybercracks. If corporate boards do not sufficiently prepare to deal with cybersecurity risk, they will be unable to oversee the effectiveness of current and proposed cybersecurity strategies. How can they know what operationally effective cybersecurity should look like and how it should evolve? And how can directors know what to look for in the boardroom to make right cybersecurity management decisions?

### Asking the Right Questions
In our work with boards of companies and in surveys of executives, we have found that senior directors currently cannot ask the right questions because they lack meaningful metrics to assess the cybersecurity of their business. In a 2016 poll of 200 CEOs conducted by RedSeal Inc., a cybersecurity analytics company in Sunnyvale, California, 87% of respondents reported needing a better way to measure the effectiveness of their cybersecurity investments, with 50% calling the absence of meaningful metrics a “major challenge.” Often, executives as well as directors spend too much time studying technical reports on such things as the numbers of intrusion detection system alerts, which are often unidentified, and software patches implemented.

To improve the situation, companies need to focus on the human element, not just basic training in cybersecurity that addresses the strategic nature, scope, and implications of cybersecurity risk. Without a clear understanding of risk in operations, security specialists, and directors alike need to adopt a common language to talk about cybersecurity risk. Second, top management needs to provide meaningful data about not just the size of the security or defense narrative, but the size of the problem. Third, there is a need for information not only about intrusions detected, but also about the resilience of the organization’s digital networks. This means having strategies to sustain business during cybersecurity breaches, to recover quickly in its aftermath, and to do so in a way that is consistent with the organization’s values. Fourth, as the threat landscape is constantly changing, tracking cyber risks and vulnerabilities in time and adapting accordingly is essential.

A few decades ago, when business computers were networked into systems of record, the risk of a breach was low. Today, organizations cannot focus exclusively on preventing outside attacks and protecting the network perimeter. However, now that computers have become ubiquitous, ground-based perimeter defenses are inadequate. Today, organizations have vast numbers of network connections and human-machine interactions taking place at all hours of the day and night. In this context, security strategies must extend far beyond the walls of a single organization to reflect interactions with suppliers, customers, and vendors. Networks are permeable, and the relevant question is no longer “Will the organization’s cyberthreats be compromised?” but “What do we do when it is breached?” For organizations, the old challenge of detecting and neutralizing threats has expanded to include learning how to continue doing business during a breach. In other words, it has expanded from security alone to security and resilience.

### Increasing Resilience
Resilience is essential in any effective cybersecurity strategy. Cyberthreats are not going away, and we need to be prepared to succeed once. Resilience assumes that attacks are immutable features of the digital business environment and that some fraction of these attacks will inevitably result in breaches. Therefore, creating resilience means creating a business that is more able to recover in the aftermath of a breach at the most critical element of a contemporary cyberdefense strategy.

Adequate organizational resilience is about operating the business while fighting back and recovering. Maintaining this level of performance requires the ability to measure an organization’s digital resilience much the way a board oversees its financial health. For board members, a fiduciary obligation is more urgent than overseeing and, where necessary, challenging how executive leadership manages the risks to the company. Managing cyberresilience is the same. We need to ensure digital networks are essential to conducting business by ensuring effective security and a high level of resilience in response to those inevitable cyberattacks. This can be accomplished by creating a foundation of leadership and allocation of resources. It is a whole-enterprise issue, requiring a holistic approach to security and resilience execution by management.

The 2017-2018 survey by NACD reveals that public company board members are more likely to be concerned about their company’s cybersecurity efforts than are C-suite executives, but 70% of respondents reported feeling “confident” or “very confident” that their company was “properly secured against a cyberattack.” 60% said they were “highly” or “moderately” confident that their company was “highly” or “moderately” well prepared by the board, pointed to similar weaknesses. Given the disconnect between the low levels and degree of preparedness, we believe that more companies need to become more realistic about their vulnerability and the need for improvement.

In 2017, the average level of cyberresilience security was expected to reach $88.4 billion and to further increase to $93 billion in 2018, according to Gartner Inc. However, cyberresilience issues are rising at more than twice the rate of expenditures in cybersecurity. Clearly, we need to do better at measuring the key aspects of the networks rather than building resilience for dealing with hackers once they have breached the perimeter. We need to know that cybersecurity is a strategic function that starts with executives. RedSeal found that 60% of CEOs surveyed treat it less as a whole business issue than an IT function, in that the IT team makes all budget decisions on cybersecurity.

### Best Practices
Building on insights from the surveys cited above, we have developed a four-part approach to help organizations manage cybersecurity more effectively and form a digital resilience strategy. It involves educating company leadership; developing a common language for management and corporate directors to discuss cybersecurity issues; setting the difference between security and resilience; and making both security and resilience a top priority for the board.

1. **Educate company leadership.** Cybersecurity risk shouldn’t be treated strictly as an IT issue. In terms of risk management, the board should be involved to manage it as an issue of importance to the entire enterprise. Increasingly, directors and boards are content to be held accountable for the security and resilience of networks and data. Board members must therefore understand the issues at stake and the risks to the enterprise for their organization’s cyberdefense posture. Company leadership must have an unambiguous understanding of the IT elements of security and resilience. Both management and directors need to be aware of: (1) the importance of security and resilience to the enterprise; (2) the need for a common strategic approach to address business during a cyberattack and to recover quickly in the aftermath of a breach).

   In order to be effective, directors need to understand the difference between security and resilience. The board must treat it as an enterprise-wide risk management issue. Directors need to understand the legal implications of cybersecurity risk and how they relate to their company’s specific circumstances.

2. **Develop a common language.** Boards must have adequate access to cybersecurity expertise, and their discussions about cybersecurity risk management should be a regular part of each board meeting agenda, with sufficient time allotted. Moreover, board engagement regarding cybersecurity issues should not be restricted to yearly or semiannual reports. A proprietary 2017 McKinsey survey (CISO) and board reporting found that CISOs who had less-than-productive board interactions felt they needed more time to discuss cybersecurity and resilience critical issues. One CISO who responded to the survey observed that “the board is not very good at asking questions that may be perceived by others to be ignorant.” No question can be considered bad or inappropriate.

   The board should be able to ask all subject-area experts, and must be able to communicate effectively with board members and other leaders. Meetings with CISOs and other subject professionals mean nothing if technical experts and directors are unable to understand one another. Information security executives must be able to communicate with directors at a level and in a format that is accessible to nontechnical corporate directors. Ideally, assessments of cybersecurity, digital resilience, and cybersecurity risk should be expressed using metrics that objectively and unambiguously score issues of risk, reward, cost, and benefit. That said, directors should make themselves conversant in basic principles relevant to digital networking and security. The goal is for CISOs and other IT executives to engage in frank, mutually intelligible dialogue with the board and appropriate subject areas. Wherever possible, IT and CISO reports should be focused on prioritized items on which the board can take action, especially those that can be addressed by the whole company.

3. **Distinguish between security and resilience.** Companies should create a common language for digital security and digital resilience. Digital security focuses on essential security measures, including the use of security controls, defenses such as effective antivirus and antimalware software, adequate firewalls, and employee education in safe computing practices. Digital resilience focuses on security issues.

   In contrast, digital resilience is a business issue, which relates to how the whole organization conducts business in a digital environment. For example, balancing data availability with the necessity of protecting it. Resilience is a business issue that involves a trade-off between security and interactivity that affects the customer experience, customer service, customer retention, acquisition of new customers, and so on. It is therefore a business issue. To the extent that the board is not aware of the business issues, for example, by arbitrarily restricting access to data, it may provide adequate security. But it is a business practice, which makes the company more liable to fail and therefore less resilient.

   The board should be able to recognize cybersecurity policy: the board must be able to balance resilience against security, with priority given to resilience. Over time, the board will develop a practical approach; therefore, resilience (the ability to respond to incidents and breaches) should be prioritized over the forlorn hope of security alone as a silver bullet. Security will not enable you to continue to conduct business during a breach. Resilience will. The board must provide adequate leadership in advocating for whole-enterprise resilience policies and practices.

4. **Make security and resilience strategic business issues.** Directors must set the expectation that management will establish an enterprise-wide cyber-risk management framework with adequate staffing and budget. The board’s discussions with management concerning cybersecurity risk should include identifying which risks to avoid, which to accept, and which to mitigate or transfer through insurance, as well as publicistic plans associated with each approach.

   In concert with top management, the board should create a clear statement of its role in corporate security and challenging the company’s digital security and resilience strategies. The statement should clearly define and assign responsibilities and must delineate the differing roles of the board and senior management. Within the board itself, cybersecurity and digital resilience strategies should be available to directors and not relegated to a committee or subaccountities. Nevertheless, boards should consider assigning one cyber-savvy director to take the lead on issues of security and resilience, and, when recruiting new directors, companies should seek out people with relevant expertise.

   The board should continually reassess the overall budget for security and resilience investments as necessary. Given the reality that the number and seriousness of breaches are growing, it is clear that most organizations need to evaluate their cybersecurity investments and clearly round effectively. Improving the ability to measure and quantify cyber-related risks is a vital step, because it allows cybersecurity and resilience to be evaluated for their impact on the entire business.

**Ray A. Rothrock** is CEO and chairman of RedSeal Inc. **James Kaplan** is a partner in the New York office of McKinsey & Co. **Friso van der Oord** is a partner in the New York office of the National Association of Corporate Directors.

*Reproduced with permission of copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.*

*MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW WINTER 2018*

*SLOANREVIEW.MIT.EDU*