# The Paradox of Organizational Rigidity: A Contingency Model for Information Processing During Times of Opportunity and Threat

*Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies*  
2015, Vol. 22(4) 395–403  
© The Authors 2015  
Reprints and permissions: sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav  
DOI: 10.1177/1548051815594884  
jo.sagepub.com  
SAGE

## Author
Brandon William Soltwisch  
University of Northern Colorado, Greeley, CO, USA  
**Corresponding Author:**  
Brandon William Soltwisch, University of Northern Colorado, Kepner Hall 1070B, Greeley, CO 80639, USA.  
Email: brandonsoltwisch@unco.edu

## Abstract
This article proposes that similar rigidity effects that occur under conditions of resource scarcity and threat also occur in opportunistic environments characterized by resource abundance. As organizations acquire more resources, they become constrained in their ability to process information at the individual, group, and organizational levels of analysis. As a result, organizations are less likely to identify and adjust to potential threats in the environment, increasing the likelihood that exogenous shocks will lead to organizational decline and failure. A contingency model is developed to identify how managers can be mindful of the decision-making limitations caused by both opportunities and threats in the environment.

**Keywords**: resource abundance, threat rigidity, opportunity rigidity, decision making

## Introduction
A highly cited article by Barry Staw, Sandelands, and Dutton (1981) introduced the concept of threat rigidity to a wide audience of organizational researchers. Their novel insights proposed that organizations would become more rigid in how they respond to external threats due to information-processing limitations at the individual, group, and organizational levels. They contended that organizations become less flexible in dealing with external threats as leaders develop a more narrow perspective of their environment, reducing the amount of alternatives they consider when making decisions. Since their insightful article, there have been many instances where dramatic periods of economic decline have negatively affected many organizations across various industries. As threat rigidity thesis predicts, researchers have identified many examples where organizational threat and decline negatively affect an organization's capacity to make strategic adaptations to pressing demands in the environment (D’Aveni & MacMillan, 1990; Deverell, 2010; Keisler & Sproull, 1982; Muurlink, Wilkinson, Peetz, & Townsend, 2012).

There have also been many instances when times of rapid growth and prosperity have brought on similar organizational paralysis, however, causing organizations to overlook important and potentially problematic changes in their environment. Many times, a “let the good times roll” mentality has made organizations more indolent in identifying and reacting to new threats in their environment. Recently, we have seen the results of what can happen when a dramatic asset bubble is allowed to form in the financial system, leading to one of the largest financial crises in U.S. history, followed by a major downturn in the global economy. Periods of rapid economic growth followed by sudden decline often have dramatic and devastating impacts on many organizations (Palmer & Maher, 2010). Paradoxically, the actions taken during periods of extended growth often leave organizations more vulnerable to decline as they become less apt at identifying potential threats and less effective in responding to changing environmental demands.

This article proposes that processing limitations occur at the individual, group, and organizational levels of analysis as a result of opportunistic environments characterized by resource abundance. When resources are plentiful during conditions of economic growth and prosperity, organizations have a reduced capacity to process potential threats in their environment, leading to more rigid responses to changing environmental demands. Rigidity is defined in this article as restricted information-processing capabilities and reduced control. This is similar to how Staw et al. (1981) conceptualized rigidity caused by threats; however, the underlying mechanisms producing the reduced decision-making capacity are largely different during conditions of resource abundance. The constraints placed on organizational decision making during resource abundance are labeled here as “opportunity rigidity.” A multilevel framework is used to illustrate how opportunistic environments, characterized by resource abundance, create information-processing limitations at the individual, group, and organizational levels of analysis. Then, a contingency model is developed to illustrate why managers should be mindful of how both opportunities and threats may reduce their capacity to make effective decisions. The reduced capacity caused by resource abundance may be even more problematic as it leaves organizations vulnerable at a time when their environment is most likely to become densely populated and dynamic.

## Individual-Level Processing
It is human nature to become overconfident when things are going well. Successful managers often refer to a single blueprint when the company is performing at high levels, leading to more rigid and restricted ways of doing business (Miller, 1993). This simplistic mind-set makes it more difficult to identify and react to potential threats in the environment. Studies on mergers and acquisitions show that managers tend to pay much higher premiums for large acquisitions when they are overconfident in the deal (Hayward & Hambrick, 1997). These managers unconsciously ignore negative feedback about the deals they are making as they view their decisions as being consistently correct. Past successful experiences create patterned responses that cause managers to ignore pertinent information as they make decisions.

This is especially dangerous since cycles of successful outcomes can become self-reinforcing, meaning that managers will become more likely to overlook potential problems as their decisions lead to more successful outcomes (Shimizu & Hitt, 2004). A study comparing housing price expectations in various cities between 2003 and 2006 identified that citizens had much higher expectations about future home prices in cities that already experienced substantial increases in home values (Shiller, 2007). People living in cities that had experienced greater previous gains had more unrealistic expectations about the future of the housing market.

The time period leading up to the financial crisis in 2009 can be characterized as a time of resource abundance due to a large asset bubble surrounding mortgage securities. Low interest rates and excessive savings in the global economy caused a steady increase in asset prices (Cohen & Remolona, 2008). During this time, managers were filled with optimism and hubris as the environment created conditions where new investments led to successful outcomes more often than not. Overconfidence was clearly displayed in the financial services industry, where mortgages were being originated to unqualified borrowers with little or no credit and no money down (Davis, 2009). Foote, Gerardi, and Willen (2012) attribute the foreclosure crisis to a series of poor decisions based on overly optimistic beliefs about housing prices.

According to these researchers, it was not a conscious effort by mortgage brokers and other financial service professionals to deceit borrowers into obtaining loans they could not afford. Instead, it was their overconfidence in home prices that allowed them to ignore the fact that many borrowers could not actually afford the homes they were buying. As the upward trend in housing prices continued, their past successes became an impetus for overlooking important information as they made new decisions.

In short, higher house price expectations rationalize the decisions of borrowers, investors, and intermediaries—their embrace of high leverage when purchasing homes or funding mortgage investments, their failure to require rigorous documentation of income or assets before making loans, and their extension of credit to borrowers with histories of not repaying debt. (Foote et al., 2012, p. 3)

Expectations about future success became an impediment to financial service professionals’ ability to identify and adjust to the growing systemic risk associated with poor lending practices. In essence, the profitability of the loans made mortgage originators blind to the risks associated with lending to unqualified borrowers.

Over time, managers develop decision-making heuristics that cause patterned responses based on past experiences (Prahalad & Bettis, 1986). Lending to unqualified borrowers became a patterned response to the increasingly profitable mortgage business. As this decision-making routine became entrenched in the organization’s culture, it became more difficult for financial institutions to identify10.1177/1548051815594884
jo.sagepub.com
SAGE
identify and adapt to the pending hazard that loomed behind the growing housing bubble. It became common practice for banks to finance home buyers who had poor credit history and no down payment (Davis, 2009). High demand in the secondary mortgage market gave banks little incentive to identify the risks associated with the loans they were underwriting. Resource abundance during the housing bubble created a false sense of security and confidence, allowing financial service professionals to overlook a growing number of potential problems in the market.

A clear example of this is the amount of time it took banks to react to changes in the housing market. The housing bubble in the U.S. economy that originated in 2002 began to deflate in 2005. By 2006, the amount of mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures began to rise dramatically; however, it was not until August of 2007, when the crisis became apparent to the financial industry (Phillips & Yu, 2011). Between 2005 and late 2007, banks continued to lend to unqualified borrowers and mortgage-backed securities were being sold to foreign investors as low-risk bonds, even though indicators were suggesting that the housing bubble had already begun to collapse (Phillips & Yu, 2011). A sense of overconfidence in housing prices caused financial professionals to overlook the fact that the housing market was oversaturated with buyers who could no longer afford their mortgage payments. Decision-making heuristics and perspectives developed during the housing bubble made it difficult to identify the pending hazard in the mortgage market. By the time the financial crisis hit the broader economy in 2008, financial institutions were so heavily invested in mortgage-related instruments that they could not effectively respond to the pending hazard.

According to prospect theory, managers will be more concerned about potential losses than future gains when making decisions about future investment opportunities (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). Individuals also tend to place greater emphasis on more certain outcomes than those that are probabilistic in nature. Therefore, decision makers become risk-averse in choosing new courses of action as they see current strategies as more resolute and less likely to fail. Adhering to the current profitable strategy is less risky than changing courses. This bias toward risk-averse strategies can have blinding effects, however, since managers may ignore important feedback about their current decision outcomes. The escalation literature has described many instances where managers ignore negative feedback about current strategic decisions because they have large investments in the current course of action.

The distinguishing feature of an escalating commitment decision is that a series of decisions are made about a single course of action rather than making an isolated choice (Staw, 1976, 1981). Thus, each decision in the series has implications for the efficacy of previous decisions as well as any outcomes of the decision. Since escalation decisions are interrelated in this respect, previous decisions have a psychological influence on people that may hinder their ability to act rationally and make the best choice given the available alternatives (Arkes & Blumer, 1985; Brockner, 1992; Staw, 1981). As more sunk costs are invested in a particular course of action, it becomes less likely that decision makers will alter their strategies in light of new information suggesting that the current one is not working as initially intended (Arkes & Blumer, 1985). In times of rapid growth and prosperity, successful outcomes associated with current strategies will inevitably lead to further investments in those strategies. As managers increase the amount of investment toward current strategies in opportunistic environments, it becomes more likely that they will ignore negative feedback about their current investment decisions and continue with the course of action.

In a case study of the construction of a nuclear power plant in Shoreham, NY, Ross and Staw (1993) showed how the Long Island Lighting Company turned an estimated $75 million project into a $5 billion endeavor that took over 23 years as they became entrenched in the increasingly expensive and unpopular construction of the nuclear plant. When the project started, nuclear power was still a popular means of providing cheap and efficient energy. Initially, local residents favored nuclear power since it was much cheaper than comparable oil plants at the time (Ross & Staw, 1993). Investments in nuclear plants were profitable ventures, and the Long Island Lighting Company viewed the project as one that would lead to long-term profits.

Before the plant was constructed, the anticipated energy needs based on current energy trends encouraged them to upgrade the size of the facility. “In 1969, LILCO changed the design of the Shoreham plant from a projected capacity of 540 megawatts to 820 megawatts on the basis of anticipated energy demand and economies of scale” (Ross & Staw, 1993, p. 709). As they continued to pour money into the plant, the political environment shifted when several disasters, including the nuclear accident at Three Mile Island and the meltdown at Chernobyl, caused a public outcry against the use of nuclear energy. However, the large initial investment in the plant made the project difficult to abandon and they continued with the construction despite clear signs that things were not going their way. According to escalation theory, the greater the amount of sunk costs invested in a particular project, the more likely it is that decision makers will overlook important feedback (Staw, 1981). As managers continue to invest in profitable business activities, they may become more apt to ignore critical information about the environment and continue with their current strategies.

At the individual level, the processes associated with overconfidence, decision-making routines, prospect theory, and escalation of commitment may cause decision makers to overlook important information about the environment when resources are abundant. This lack of attention may create a more rigid response to organizational threats, leading to higher propensities of organizational decline and failure in dynamic environments. For the aforementioned reasons, the following proposition is offered.

**Proposition 1**: Information processing will increase in rigidity at the individual level during times of resource abundance.

## Group-Level Effects
Many important organizational decisions are made by committees. Group dynamics can pose additional barriers to how decision makers process environmental demands. Top management teams in thriving companies keep the same members longer and follow more consistent strategies. As management teams become more homogenous over time, they are less likely to incorporate new perspectives and evaluate alternatives when making decisions (Finkelstein & Hambrick, 1990). In the banking industry, more homogeneous top management teams tend to develop less innovative strategies (Bantel & Jackson, 1989) and were more likely to get involved with problematic subprime lending practices during the housing bubble (Muller-Kahle & Lewellyn, 2011). Profitable companies are also less likely to have nonroutine executive turnover (Kang & Shivdasani, 1996). When the companies go through long periods of high returns, they are less likely to bring in new people with unique backgrounds and perspectives to their top management team. As a result, these top management teams may view their environment through a narrower lens, making it easier to overlook industry adaptations and changes from unforeseen sources.

Highly cohesive groups can arrive at a decision before they sufficiently evaluate all of the available alternatives. This occurs through the process of groupthink (Janis, 1972). Groupthink is most common in highly confident and cohesive teams where there is little disagreement among members (Callaway & Esser, 1984). Top management teams in successful companies tend to become more homogenous and adhere more strictly to idiosyncratic customs within their own organizations (Kotter & Heskett, 1992). These cohesive teams with long tenure are likely to arrive at alternatives before considering all of the available options. Teams that perform at very high levels tend to exude less cognitive diversity among members (Kilduff, Angerlmar, & Mehra, 2000), making them less likely to bring in contentious viewpoints when making decisions. A lack of divergent thinking within the group may cause these teams to converge on a particular decision without properly evaluating the alternatives.

As top management teams become more homogenous and confident during times of resource abundance, they will become more likely to converge on decisions without realistically evaluating the alternatives as they see themselves as being less likely to fail. This “illusion of invulnerability” associated with groupthink can be found in the case of the Ford/Firestone disaster that resulted in the loss of hundreds of lives and the recall of 6.5 million Firestone brand tires (Valentine, Valentine, & McMinn, 2012). Both Ford and Firestone ignored mounting evidence suggesting that the tires were faulty on the Explorer vehicle. There had been numerous insurance claims, police reports, lawsuits, and consumer complaints about the tires as early as 1993. Additionally, both Ford and Firestone ignored internal data suggesting that the tires produced a high risk of rollover when inflated to 35 pounds per square inch (Valentine et al., 2012). The success of Ford’s sports utility vehicle division during the time period leading up to the recall in May of 2000, created a false sense of confidence among key decision makers, causing them to overlook the dangerous problems associated with the tires instead of fixing them (Valentine et al., 2012). In times of continued success, highly confident teams will be more likely to partake in groupthink (Callaway & Esser, 1984), causing them to overlook alternatives as they make important strategic decisions.

Cultural and political elements of organizations often shape how management responds to environmental contingencies. As much as success is revered by other organization members, failure may be frowned on and potentially detrimental to one’s career. Cultural norms within thriving organizations place tremendous emphasis on being successful and avoiding mistakes. In these organizations, managers will be less likely to bring up potential problems as they may fear retribution from their superiors. Maintaining the status quo is politically less risky than making major changes, so decision makers may be inclined to continue with a particular strategy even if it is not the best option given the environmental circumstances. In the time period leading up to the financial crisis, the reward structure and culture in the financial services industry was set up in such a way that promoted the exchange of questionable mortgage securities, even as the underlying value of homes was declining (Palmer & Maher, 2010). Since commissions and trading fees were often paid up front, financial service employees responsible for originating, securitizing, and insuring new loans became less likely to pass up on questionable deals since it would mean relinquishing short-term income (Kane, 2009). Home loans had become a profitable source of income for many financial institutions. Since they could sell the debt to other financial intermediaries, banks developed incentive structures that pushed for short-term gains. As a result, issuing loans to questionable borrowers became a routine activity within the banking community. This cultural emphasis on short-term gains during times of success made it increasingly difficult for banks to identify the growing risks associated with the housing bubble.

Group-level decision making has many advantages when members have diverse perspectives. However, groups are also influenced by various cultural, political, and dynamic factors that may cause them to jump to conclusions without adequately evaluating alternatives. Top management teams in highly profitable companies may become overconfident in their ability to make decisions, and therefore overlook important information in their environment. These management teams also become more homogenous over time, reducing their tendency to challenge the status quo. Due to the culture, political environment, and cohesive group mentality developed during times of resource abundance, decision making can become more constrained at the group level. Therefore, the following proposition is offered.

**Proposition 2**: Information processing will increase in rigidity at the group level during times of resource abundance.

## Organization-Level Effects
Profitable organizations tend to move in one direction, developing a culture and set of routines that contribute to successful behaviors. Previously established habits and routines remain intact as long as they produce profitable results (Nelson & Winter, 2002). New procedures and role structures are enacted to maintain those routines. These added barriers influence how decision makers make sense of their environment (Gersick & Hackman, 1990) and reduce their flexibility in dealing with external threats (Ashforth & Fried, 1988). Customs and traditions associated with profitable activities become part of the organization’s structure when they are cemented into the policy and procedures that guide how work is performed. Decision routines developed over periods of long-term success may cause the same procedures to be repeated, even if they are no longer suitable to the new environmental conditions (Shimizu & Hitt, 2004).

When the newspaper industry confronted new competition from digital media content, traditional print newspapers were slow to adopt the new technology because they had developed specific procedures and decision-making routines over time. A field study by Gilbert (2005) revealed that when the newspaper industry began to transition from largely print content to more online content, decision-making routines at newspaper companies became an obstacle to the adoption of digital mediums. The traditional model of print news and subscription service had been successful for so long that the decision-making patterns built up over time in the newspaper industry caused them to overlook changing demand for print news.

Newspaper companies had become highly centralized in their decision making, reverting any operational-level decisions to the company headquarters for approval. For example, CEO approval was required for all new hires at local sites (Gilbert, 2005). Each paper received a detailed budget and marketing plan from the headquarters of the flagship journal. Managers and reporters at the local level were required to adhere to firm orders from headquarters. As they deployed an increasingly strict adherence to company procedures, decision makers at the local level became more limited in the amount and type of alternative news sources they considered (Gilbert, 2005).

The policy and procedures developed over the tenure of success in print news made it nearly impossible to make any strategic adjustments at the local level. Since the company’s headquarters was out of tune with the demands of subscribers (Gilbert, 2005), the newspaper industry was slow in responding to the new technology, resulting in a loss of market share to new online competitors such as Yahoo and Twitter. Decision-making routines became highly structured and centralized in the newspaper industry. As a result, decision makers at the top level experienced information overload, placing added constraints on their time and cognitive capacity to evaluate alternatives (Miller, 1993). Complexity in the decision-making process can be seen as the result of more formal structure due to strict adherence to organizational routines revolving around profitable activities. These layers of complexity make organizations more likely to overlook key information at the local level.

Over time, investments in plant, property, and equipment increase structural inertia, making organizations slow in responding to environmental changes (Hannan & Freeman, 1984). As organizations expand their operations during profitable times, new structural elements can make it more difficult for decision makers to adjust their current strategies. A study of 45 firms in the electrical industry showed that companies develop more complex organizational structures in prosperous environments (Yasai-Ardekani, 1989). New technologies are often incorporated to facilitate profitable business activities. Running these new technologies requires a substantial amount of time and resources. During the housing bubble, complex mortgage derivatives became a profitable investment vehicle for investment banks. This new technology was not well understood, however, as few people realized the risks associated with these complex mortgage investments (Palmer & Maher, 2010). Companies on a positive growth trajectory often make investments in new equipment and technology to expand their business operations. In a study of 438 manufacturing plants, profitable plants with significant sunk costs were less likely to change their organizational structure (Colombo & Delmastro, 2002). These structural investments can make organizations more rigid since they have invested large amounts of time and resources in operating the current technology.

Resource dependence theory postulates that organizations need to exchange with other actors in their environment to obtain critical resources. As profitable organizations exchange large volumes of goods with buyers and suppliers, they become highly dependent on key actors in their supply chain (Pfeffer & Salancik, 1978). As organizations gear their operations to accommodate large exchange partners during times of growth, they become more reliant on maintaining those relationships. During the housing bubble, banks exchanged large amounts of mortgage-backed securities, specifically between traditional savings and loan institutions and investment banks. Efforts to maintain these profitable exchanges encouraged relaxed lending practices in the mortgage industry. As long as investment banks continued to buy mortgage obligations, there was little incentive to ensure that borrowers could pay back the loans they were underwriting (Palmer & Maher, 2010). High interdependence among financial institutions allowed banks to overlook the systemic risk associated with the housing bubble (Soltwisch, 2013). Although the housing bubble actually began to deflate in 2006, it was not until 2008 when banks realized they had overlooked key indicators suggesting that the housing market had already begun to collapse. The continuation of poor lending practices despite signs of slowing demand led to one of the largest financial crises since the Great Depression. The interdependence of supply chain partners built around the profitable mortgage business caused banks to become more reliant on one specific investment vehicle.

It is often easier to maintain existing partnerships rather than looking to diversify the supply chain. Successful performance history builds trust among supply partners over time (Liedtka, 1996). As partners develop trusting relationships, they are more likely to remain partners through an economic decline (Hoyt & Huq, 2000). Developing new supply partners can be an extremely time-consuming and costly proposition, making organizations less likely to abandon their existing suppliers for new ones. Keeping the supply network intact has advantages during times of growth; however, it may cause organizations to overlook new opportunities as they attempt to maintain the profitable relationships.

In summary, as companies expand their structural elements to accommodate profitable business activities, they will inevitably make it more difficult to identify and react to new environmental demands. Using the same technologies and means for acquiring information may cause companies to overlook new sources of competition in their environment. Structural inertia through investments in plant, property, and equipment can make organizations slow to adapt (Hannan & Freeman, 1984). These more complex structures can also strain the information-processing capabilities of the organization as decision makers at the top face information overload. Structural changes associated with profitable business operations may ultimately leave the organization more vulnerable to new threats since these changes make it difficult to identify and respond to pending threats. Therefore, the following proposition is offered.

**Proposition 3**: Information processing will increase in rigidity at the organizational level during times of resource abundance.

## Contingency Model
Research on threat rigidity shows how organizations can become more limited in their ability to process information during times of resource scarcity and crisis. As organizations face threats caused by resource constraints, they turn to more recognized responses and limit their information search in their external environment (Staw, 1981). Similarly, opportunistic environments characterized by resource abundance may constrain information processing as organizations continue to pursue profitable strategies over less known alternatives. The theory developed in this article proposes that resource abundance may cause organizations to become more rigid in their ability to process information at the individual, group, and organizational levels of analysis.

This is counter to the “resources as slack” perspective, which suggests that decision making becomes more flexible as resources are readily available. It suggests that decision makers need to be concerned about rigidity during times of both opportunity and threat. It is akin to the example of a lion in the Savanna that requires food for survival. A well-fed lion may be too full to hunt, and let an easy meal pass by. A starving lion, on the other hand, may not have enough energy to hunt. In either case, the lion will not survive if it remains hungry or full for too long. Similarly, organizations will dramatically reduce their survival chances if they become rigid for too long. It is important that managers recognize how the level of resources affects their ability to identify and react to potential threats in their environment.

Taking threat rigidity and opportunity rigidity together suggests that decision-making limitations occur in environments characterized by both high and low levels of resources. Thus, firms may become more vulnerable to changing environmental demands during the peaks and troughs of economic cycles. Figure 1 depicts a contingency model showing how information-processing limitations can occur as the environment shifts from conditions of resource scarcity to resource abundance over time.

**Figure 1. Contingency model.**  
*Note.* The dotted line represents the level of resources in the environment over time. Information-processing limitations exist when resources are very low (threat rigidity) and very high (opportunity rigidity).

As environments shift from one resource extreme to another over time, organizations should be mindful of the decision-making limitations that may occur at different levels of resources. If organizations wait until resources become scarce, they may have a much more difficult time adapting, since they will have fewer resources available to exercise their options (Staw, 1981). As the environment reaches resource abundance, continued investments in profitable activities can make it more difficult to maneuver if the competitive landscape changes. Paradoxically, organizations should be most mindful of their environments during these times of resource extremes, when they may be most rigid in their capacity to respond. Environments characterized by slack resources will attract new competitors (Hannan & Freeman, 1977). These highly competitive environments are often more dynamic, resulting in completely new ways of doing business. Decision-making routines surrounding profitable business activities can make organizations less likely to identify and react to the pending hazards caused by the very conditions that facilitated their success. Thus, organizations should be most mindful of their environment when they may be most apt to ignore it.

## Conclusions and Implications
Understanding the actions taken by organizations during periods of prolonged growth is informative in explaining why they often overlook pending hazards in their environment.

Although both threats and opportunities may generate similar decision-making constraints, the mechanisms in which these limitations occur are vastly different in each condition. Threatening environments are typified by a loss of control and limited resources. These environments reduce information processing by internalizing decision making, as resource constraints make it less likely that organizations will attempt new strategies (Staw, 1981). Some have suggested that top management teams can be proactive in alarming organizational members about potential threats that may undermine an organization’s viability as a way to combat threat rigidity (Barnett & Pratt, 2000). This preemptive strike may open up communication channels and decentralize decision making, allowing the organization to better cope with the information-processing limitations associated with threat rigidity. Although this may be a feasible option for reducing the impact of threats, managers are left with relatively few options once resources become scarce as they have no cash to combat the crisis.

The advantage of opportunistic environments is that they are characterized by abundant resources (Dutton & Jackson, 1987), providing managers with more options for combating the information-processing restrictions associated with profitable activities. Similar to Barnett and Pratt’s (2000) prescription for Threat Rigidity, top management teams can induce a preeminent strike against complacency in resource-rich environments. At the organizational level, decentralizing the decision-making process and allowing for increased information flows at the local level may provide some early warning signs of potential threats in the environment. Efforts to reduce sunk costs and structural inertia associated with profitable activities may reduce the tendency to become overly committed to a single course of action. Managers should be mindful of the tendency to become reliant on a limited amount of buyers and suppliers during resource abundance. Setting a limit on the percentage of contracts associated with any given supplier will allow managers to remain flexible in negotiating new deals.

At the group level, efforts to limit the tenure of top management teams may reduce groupthink and introduce new perspectives into the decision-making process. Banks with more diverse teams tend to adopt more innovative business practices (Bantel & Jackson, 1989). A study of Fortune 500 companies revealed that shorter average top management team tenure was correlated with more corporate strategic change (Wiersema & Bantel, 1992). Since there is less pressure for change during profitable times, the change may need to be initiated by guiding policies. Rules could set the limits on the tenure of top managers as a way to bring in new perspectives. Cultural norms surrounding opportunity recognition will make it more acceptable to identify new ways of doing business, even when current practices are profitable. Rewards could be given for those new ideas that change the way business is conducted.

At the individual level, reducing or eliminating decision-making routines and overconfidence in current strategies may mitigate rigidity effects. A system of checks and balances could be established to ensure that alternative options are considered in the decision-making process. Managers should alter their habits and routines from time to time to increase the range of options they consider. They can also seek out new viewpoints to inform the decision-making process. Since managers have little incentive to scan their environment during profitable times, they could set up regular forecasting meetings to keep staff members informed of what is going on in the competitive landscape. Being mindful of the tendency to overlook pertinent information in resource-rich environments will help managers avoid falling asleep at the wheel when treacherous conditions may lie ahead.

## Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

## Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

## References
- Arkes, H. R., & Blumer, C. (1985). The psychology of sunk cost. *Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 35*, 124–140.
- Ashforth, B. E., & Fried, Y. (1988). The mindlessness of organizational behaviors. *Human Relations, 41*, 305–329.
- Bantel, K., & Jackson, S. (1989). Top management and innovations in banking: Does the composition of the top management team make a difference? *Strategic Management Journal, 10*, 107–124.
- Barnett, C. K., & Pratt, M. G. (2000). From threat-rigidity to flexibility: Toward a learning model of autogenic crisis in organizations. *Journal of Organizational Change Management, 13*, 74–88.
- Brockner, J. (1992). The escalation of commitment to a failing course of action: Toward theoretical progress. *Academy of Management Review, 17*, 39–61.
- Callaway, M., & Esser, J. (1984). Groupthink: Effects of cohesiveness and problem-solving procedures on group decision making. *Social Behavior and Personality, 12*, 157–164.
- Cohen, B., & Remolona, E. (2008). The unfolding turmoil of 2007–2008: Lessons and responses. Retrieved from http://www.rba.gov.au/publications/confs/2008/cohen-remolona.html
- Colombo, M. G., & Delmastro, M. (2002). The determinants of organizational change and structural inertia: Technological and organizational factors. *Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 11*, 595–635.
- D’Aveni, R., & MacMillan, I. (1990). Crisis and the content of managerial communications: A study of the focus of attention of top managers in surviving and failing firms. *Administrative Science Quarterly, 35*, 634–657.
- Davis, G. F. (2009). The rise and fall of finance and the end of the society of organizations. *Academy of Management Perspectives, 23*(3), 27–44.
- Deverell, E. (2010). Flexibility and rigidity in crisis management and learning at Swedish public organizations. *Public Management Review, 12*, 697–700.
- Dutton, J. E., & Jackson, S. E. (1987). Categorizing strategic issues: Links to organizational action. *Academy of Management Review, 12*, 76–90.
- Foote, C., Gerardi, K., & Willen, P. (2012, May). Why did so many people make so many ex post bad decisions? The cause of the foreclosure crisis (Working Paper No. 18082). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. Retrieved from http://www.nber.org/papers/w18082.pdf
- Finkelstein, S., & Hambrick, D. (1990). Top management team tenure and organizational outcomes: The moderating role of managerial discretion. *Administrative Science Quarterly, 35*, 484–503.
- Gersick, C., & Hackman, R. (1990). Habitual routines in task-performing groups. *Critical Studies in Economic Institutions, 4*, 383–415.
- Gilbert, C. (2005). Unbundling the structure of inertia: Resource versus routine rigidity. *Academy of Management Journal, 48*, 741–763.
- Hannan, M., & Freeman, J. (1984). Structural inertia and organizational change. *American Sociological Review, 49*, 149–164.
- Hannan, M. T., & Freeman, J. (1977). The population ecology of organizations. *American Journal of Sociology, 82*, 929–964.
- Hayward, M. L. A., & Hambrick, D. C. (1997). Explaining the premiums paid for large acquisitions: Evidence of CEO hubris. *Administrative Science Quarterly, 42*, 103–127.
- Hoyt, J., & Huq, F. (2000). From arms-length to collaborative relationships in the supply chain: An evolutionary process. *International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 30*, 750–764.
- Janis, I. (1972). *Victims of groupthink: Psychological study of foreign policy decisions and fiascoes*. Oxford, England: Houghton Mifflin.
- Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. *Intellectual Roots of Entrepreneurship, 23*, 577–605.
- Kane, E. J. (2009). Incentive roots of the securitization crisis and its early mismanagement. *Yale Journal on Regulation, 26*, 405–416.
- Kang, J., & Shivdasani, A. (1996). Does the Japanese government system enhance shareholder wealth? Evidence from the stock-price effects of top management turnover. *Review of Financial Studies, 9*, 1061–1095.
- Keisler, S., & Sproull, L. (1982). Managerial response to changing environments: Perspectives on problem sensing from social cognition. *Administrative Science Quarterly, 27*, 548–570.
- Kilduff, M., Angerlmar, R., & Mehra, A. (2000). Top management-team diversity and firm performance: Examining the role of cognitions. *Organization Science, 11*, 21–34.
- Kotter, J. P., & Heskett, J. L. (1992). Corporate culture and performance. *Sloan Management Review, 33*(3), 91–92.
- Liedtka, J. M. (1996). Collaborating across lines of business for competitive advantage. *Academy of Management Executive, 10*(2), 20–37.
- Miller, D. (1993). The architecture of simplicity. *Academy of Management Review, 18*, 116–138.
- Muller-Kahle, M., & Lewellyn, K. B. (2011). Did board configuration matter? The case of the U.S. subprime lenders. *Corporate Governance: An International Review, 19*, 405–417.
- Muurlink, O., Wilkinson, A., Peetz, D., & Townsend, K. (2012). Managerial autism: Threat-rigidity and rigidity’s threat. *British Journal of Management, 23*, 74–87.
- Nelson, R. R., & Winter, S. G. (2002). Evolutionary theorizing in economics. *Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16*(2), 23–46.
- Palmer, D., & Maher, M. (2010). A normal accident analysis of the mortgage meltdown. *Research in the Sociology of Organizations, 30*, 219–256.
- Pfeffer, J., & Salancik, G. (1978). *The external control of organizations: A resource dependence perspective*. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
- Phillips, P., & Yu, J. (2011). Dating the timeline of financial bubbles during the subprime crisis. *Quantitative Economics, 2*, 455–491.
- Prahalad, C. K., & Bettis, R. (1986). The dominant logic: A new linkage between diversity and performance. *Strategic Management Journal, 7*, 485–501.
- Ross, J., & Staw, B. M. (1993). Organizational escalation and exit: Lessons from the Shoreham nuclear power plant. *Academy of Management Journal, 36*(4), 701–732.
- Shiller, R. (2007, October). Understanding recent trends in house prices and home ownership (Working Paper No. 13553). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. Retrieved from http://www.nber.org/papers/w13553.pdf
- Shimizu, K., & Hitt, M. A. (2004). Strategic flexibility: Organizational preparedness to reverse ineffective strategic decisions. *Academy of Management Executive, 18*(4), 44–59.
- Soltwisch, B. W. (2013). Applying an organizational lens to the study of financial crisis: An analysis of the U.S. housing bubble. *Journal of Business and Economics in Times of Crisis, 1*(2), 23–42.
- Staw, B. (1976). Knee-deep in the big muddy: A study of escalating commitment to a chosen course of action. *Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 16*, 27–44.
- Staw, B. (1981). The escalation of commitment to a course of action. *Academy of Management Review, 6*, 557–587.
- Staw, B. M., Sandelands, L. E., & Dutton, J. E. (1981). Threat-rigidity effects in organizational behavior: A multilevel analysis. *Administrative Science Quarterly, 26*, 501–524.
- Valentine, R., Valentine, D., & McMinn, N. (2012). How groupthink influenced the Ford/Firestone fiasco. *Journal of International Diversity, 2012*(4), 154.
- Wiersema, M. F., & Bantel, K. A. (1992). Top management team demography and corporate strategic change. *Academy of Management Journal, 35*, 91–121.
- Yasai-Ardekani, M. (1989). Effects of environmental scarcity and munificence on the relationship of context to organizational structure. *Academy of Management Journal, 32*, 131–156.

## Author Biography
Brandon William Soltwisch is an Assistant Professor of Management at the University of Northern Colorado. His research focuses on the strategic decision-making process within organizations.