# JOURNAL OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS
**Vol. 35, No. 1**  
**Spring 2021**  
**pp. 135–186**  
**American Accounting Association**  
**DOI: 10.2308/ISSYS-19-033**

## An Integrative Review and Analysis of Cybersecurity Research: Current State and Future Directions

**Stephanie Walton**  
Louisiana State University

**Patrick R. Wheeler**  
Florida Gulf Coast University

**Yiyang (Ian) Zhang**  
Youngstown State University

**Xinlei (Ray) Zhao**  
The University of Toledo

---

### ABSTRACT
Advances in information technology have greatly changed communications and business transactions between firms and their customers and suppliers. As a result, cybersecurity risk attracts ever increasing attention from firms, regulators, customers, shareholders, and academics. The Securities and Exchange Commission has released guidance on the disclosure of cybersecurity risk, incidents, and potential internal control solutions in the managers' discussions and analysis section of 10-K annual financial reports. Despite internal control solutions, cybersecurity research has rapidly expanded, especially since 2008. Recent issues of premier accounting research journals include cybersecurity research, making seminal contributions to accounting theory and practice (e.g., Brown, Tian, and Tucker 2018; Lawrence, Minuti-Meza, and Vyas 2018; Tan and Yu 2018). The *Journal of Accounting and Public Policy* and the *Journal of Information Systems* have published special issues for cybersecurity-related studies in 2018 and 2019, respectively.

The extant cybersecurity research literature examines implications related to regulators' concerns in addition to factors surrounding cybersecurity incidents. Cybersecurity research has evolved from examining hypothetical scenarios to using actual breach data from sources such as the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse. In addition to advancing our understanding of cybersecurity practices within organizations, cybersecurity research can inform policy makers of the possible determinants and outcomes of cybersecurity incidents and predict how the market will react to information regarding such incidents. Cybersecurity research may also have important implications for improving the discussion of cybersecurity activities in financial disclosures and the effective communication of such information to external stakeholders. However, there is no cohesive organization of the burgeoning literature to suggest future research opportunities.

Our study differs from two prior cybersecurity research review papers in terms of literature selection criteria, cybersecurity research classification framework, and research focus. Prior cybersecurity reviews generally focus on the economic consequences of cybersecurity incidents (e.g., market reaction and firm performance), aiming to generalize individual findings. This study incorporates both conceptual and empirical papers published in accounting and wider business research journals. We address the following research questions: What is the current state of cybersecurity research? How can the extant literature inform practice and future research? Answering these research questions will (1) provide a thorough review of the cybersecurity literature, (2) develop a classification scheme for cybersecurity research, (3) identify areas in the literature that could yield fruitful future research, and (4) propose improvements to cybersecurity-related practices. We organize our review around five key cybersecurity literature topics: (1) cybersecurity risk disclosure, (2) cybersecurity investment, (3) information security governance, (4) security emphasis of cybersecurity incidents and spillover effect, and (5) manager, auditor, and management research and remedial strategies. We consider the opportunities for future research in each topic and the need for synergistic interdisciplinary research questions.

This literature review contributes to the accounting cybersecurity literature in several ways. First, we provide an in-depth review of the cybersecurity research literature in accounting, information systems, and business. We do not restrict our review to one area of cybersecurity and use highly inclusive review keywords to search a list of over 25 funding journals. Second, we systematically categorize and summarize the results to provide numerous suggestions for future research. Finally, our review should be helpful for academic and practice-oriented researchers, both to understand the cybersecurity literature in a synthesized manner and to conduct future research. We discuss the potential impact of cybersecurity research on accounting and auditing practices in light of regulatory policies and the AICPA’s cybersecurity risk management reporting framework (AICPA 2017a, 2017c).

---

### II. CYBERSECURITY BACKGROUND
The International Telecommunications Union (ITU) defines cybersecurity as the collection of tools, policies, security concepts, security safeguards, guidelines, risk management approaches, actions, training, best practices, assurance, and technologies that can be used to protect the cyber environment and organization and user’s assets (ITU 2018). Dunu-Cavety (2010) defines cybersecurity as “both about the insecurity related through cybersecurity and about technical/comical practices, and making a relevant future research, a decision and the security activity generally include two extensions, and protections and threats. Protections emphasize the mechanisms that defend against unauthorized use, modification, exploitation, while threats focus on the determinants of a breach (e.g., valuable assets, vulnerable infrastructures, poor internal controls) and the consequences of a breach (e.g., organization and user losses).

According to the Ponemon Institute’s (2019) *Cost of a Data Breach Study*, the average cost of a data breach in 2019 is $3.92 million, or stated otherwise, $150 per lost or stolen record, a 1 percent increase from 2018. According to this survey, the top five reasons for the cost of breaches rising in the U.S. are third-party involvement, extensive cloud migration, compliance failures, extensive use of mobile platforms, and lost or stolen devices. Several high-profile data breaches have occurred in recent years, including the much-publicized breaches at Equifax Inc., Facebook, Inc., Exactis LLC, and Under Armour, Inc. These incidents have renewed, heightened, and shaped concerns about cybersecurity. In July 2017, Equifax’s data breach affected over 143 million individuals, compromising such personal information as social security numbers, credit cards, drivers’ licenses, dates of birth, phone numbers, and email addresses (Fleishman 2018). Facebook’s 2019 data breach similarly impacted 540 million records of individuals’ personal information (Silvestein 2019). Information from 340 businesses and individuals were affected by marketing firm Exactis’ breach in June 2018 (Greenberg 2018). The retail industry is not exempt, with Under Armour’s May 2018 breach exposing 150 million customers’ information (Aiello 2018). It is no longer a question of whether a data breach will occur, but rather when, increasing the importance of cybersecurity in all aspects of a firm (Cheng and Walton 2019).

Given the significant costs of a data breach to multiple parties, it is critical to plan relevant protection mechanisms in response to general and specific threats. Dewar (2014) notes that the optimal goal of cybersecurity is to enable operations in cyberspace free from significant cybersecurity risks. Several guides and frameworks have emerged to address underlying cybersecurity risks and disclosures. In 2019, the Center for Internet Security (CIS) issued its *CIS Controls Version 7.1* for developing and implementing cybersecurity controls, while in 2017, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) issued a new cybersecurity control framework (CIS 2019, NIST 2019). In order to assist accountants engaged in examining and reporting on cybersecurity risks, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) has also developed a cybersecurity risk management reporting framework (AICPA 2017a). Additionally, the CAQ has published resources and tools to assist board of directors members in identifying potential cybersecurity risks (CAQ 2018). In the academy, cybersecurity is becoming an important topic in almost all business disciplines: accounting, management information systems (MIS), management, and marketing.

The extant cybersecurity literature documents various breach determinants, consequences, and control mechanisms. However, within the cybersecurity literature, it is not known how many significant determinants of data breaches or cybersecurity incidents remain to be identified or if all of the significant ones have been found. Further, the full scope of the consequences of various cybersecurity incidents is unknown, especially whether there are optimal remedies to minimize costs. Most importantly, it is unknown whether the existing control mechanisms are able to effectively identify and counter identified determinants. Thus, to address these concerns and gain a clearer picture of the current status of cybersecurity literature, our study systematically reviews all business-related cybersecurity articles within our selection criteria, categorizes the literature, and identifies gaps that could be utilized for future cybersecurity research.

---

### III. METHODOLOGY AND ARTICLE ANALYSIS

#### Existing Literature Reviews
We identify two reviews that examine a subset of cybersecurity topics covered in our literature review: Richardson et al. (2019) and Haapamäki and Silvonen (2019). Our study extends beyond cybersecurity’s economic impact and focuses on a holistic understanding of a firm’s cybersecurity activities. Richardson et al. (2019) review four economic consequences of data breaches: stock market response, long-term performance, audit fees, and internal control reports. The authors summarize the data sources, sample selection criteria, time periods, estimation models, and main results. The primary purpose is to identify mixed results and the economic impact of using the same data sources, sample selection, and time period. Our literature review includes five topics that broadly cover the spectrum of cybersecurity research rather than focusing solely on cybersecurity economic consequences. Further, Richardson et al. (2019) do not conclude that there is a significant economic impact of cybersecurity breaches in their synthetic analysis. We discuss and provide insights for future cybersecurity research topics. Haapamäki and Silvonen (2019) review 39 articles within accounting and auditing. We synthesize not only accounting cybersecurity research but also information systems and computer science research. We also provide a topical research framework to investigate how cybersecurity impacts organizations and individuals. Furthermore, we provide a series of research questions in each topic to address accounting implications.

#### Article Selection
Following Ku and Firoozi’s (2019) article searching strategy, we first identify nine keywords to use as search terms to find relevant cybersecurity articles. The keywords include: “cybersecurity,” “cyber attack,” “information security,” “data breach,” “data security,” “IT security,” “cyber risk,” “information risk,” and “security breach.” We search for these keywords in journals with at least a “B” ranking on the Australian Business Deans Council (ABDC) journal list, covering accounting, finance, management, and marketing journals. Then, we search for the nine keywords from each journal’s publisher website, including the American Accounting Association (AAA) Digital Library, Elsevier, Springer, ScienceDirect, Emerald Group Publishing, Taylor & Francis, Informs, and Wiley. In total, we identify 60 cybersecurity-related articles.

In order to enrich our sample size, we also search for articles investigating cybersecurity topics in computer science journal databases: the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and Association for Information Systems Electronic Library (AISEL). Finally, we also search for cybersecurity-related articles from Google Scholar and ABI/Inform Global. We then manually filter each article and include only peer-reviewed published papers that investigate business-related topics, including accounting, finance, MIS, management, and marketing. After removing duplicates and irrelevant articles, we identify eight additional articles for a total of 68 papers published from January 2001 to October 2019 that satisfy our inclusion criteria.

#### Article Analysis
Table 1 presents the journal distribution of articles selected for further review. Of the 68 articles, 35 articles (51 percent) are published in accounting journals. Accounting sectional journals, including the *Journal of Information Systems*, *Journal of Accounting and Public Policy*, and *International Journal of Accounting Information Systems*, are the top three accounting outlets publishing the most cybersecurity-related articles, with a total of 28 articles. In addition, 21 articles (31 percent) ranging from 2011 to 2019 are published in MIS journals and are evenly distributed across the top three MIS journals, including *MIS Quarterly*, *Information Systems Research*, and *Journal of Management Information Systems*. Finally, four articles (6 percent) are published in marketing and management journals, and eight articles (12 percent) are published in computer science journals.

Figure 1 presents the distribution of cybersecurity papers by year. There is a clear upward trend of cybersecurity paper publication from 2008 to 2019, with the highest rate of publication in 2018. One possible reason for such an upward trend is the growing frequency of data breach incidents, such as The Home Depot, Inc., JP Morgan Chase & Co., Target Corporation, and the PlayStation Network, and renewed interest in examining cybersecurity broadly. Figure 2 presents the distribution of cybersecurity papers by methodology. The extant cybersecurity literature reflects a preference for studies utilizing an archival methodology, possibly due to the availability of data breach and economic data that could be used to derive policy implications.

#### Organizing Framework
As shown in Figure 3, we organize our literature review around five key topics. For each topic, we first categorize overall research findings into different subtopics. Next, we evaluate and synthesize between selected studies in each subtopic. We identify gaps and opportunities based on existing studies, present research and practice implications, and call for future research to explore these areas. The key topics are:

1. **Cybersecurity Risk Disclosure**—exploring the determinants of informative cybersecurity disclosure and investigating the impact of cybersecurity disclosures.
2. **Cybersecurity Investment**—exploring the factors that may increase (reduce) benefits (costs) of cybersecurity investment and investigating the impact of cybersecurity investments.
3. **Information Security Governance**—investigating the influence of executive characteristics and cybersecurity support, the internal audit function, and internal control compliance and effectiveness on cybersecurity.
4. **Market Response to Cybersecurity Incidents and Spillover Effect**—investigating the capital market’s reaction to cybersecurity incidents and possible spillover effects.
5. **Manager, Auditor, and Customer Responses and Remedial Strategies**—examining how managers, auditors, and customers respond to cybersecurity incidents and the strategies used for recovery.

---

### IV. POTENTIAL RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES
Increasing interest in cybersecurity highlights the need for future insightful and impactful interdisciplinary cybersecurity research. Since cybersecurity can directly impact firms’ financial reporting practices and stakeholders’ perceptions, understanding cybersecurity becomes paramount, especially as cybersecurity incidents occur at an ever-increasing rate. Cybersecurity can impact controls, operational, reputational, compliance, and litigation risks, and a firm’s corporate governance. Future research could provide managerial insights and policy implications that improve our understanding and management of cybersecurity. Additionally, research can identify cybersecurity solutions and explain individual and firm behavior. In this section, we use our topical organization framework to guide the discussion of future research opportunities. While the five topics provide a starting point for identifying future opportunities, we encourage further cross-topic research. Further, underscoring each of these issues is the need for additional pedagogical studies focused on broadening our ability to instill students with a robust understanding of the growing role of cybersecurity in firms. In Table 8, we present future research areas, research methods, and research questions.

#### Cybersecurity Risk Disclosure
##### Determinants of Cybersecurity Risk Disclosure
Cybersecurity can have a major impact on firms and their stakeholders, yet we identify only two studies (Gordon et al. 2006, Brown et al. 2018) that investigate determinants of cybersecurity risk disclosure. As such, future research needs to broadly consider the determinants of cybersecurity disclosures, including industry and firm characteristics, regulations, and management incentives.

**Industry and Firm Characteristics.** Both industry and firm characteristics could provide specific evidence on disclosure determinants. A better understanding of how unique intra- and inter-industry characteristics impact the extent of a firm’s cybersecurity transparency and whether market leaders or competitors promote disclosure is needed. Are certain industries more likely than others to disclose cybersecurity activities? Within a specific industry, how can firms be prompted to provide cybersecurity disclosures? Do disclosures of cybersecurity incidents in firms prompt cybersecurity disclosures in previously non-disclosing firms (e.g., to mitigate any market spillover effect of an incident)? Additionally, research could investigate which industry and firm characteristics, such as the prior disclosure of an internal control weakness, are associated with meaningful (e.g., non-boilerplate) disclosures. Do prior cybersecurity incidents and material control weaknesses in other firms promote meaningful cybersecurity disclosures? Finally, firms’ information technology characteristics could be examined as possible disclosure determinants, including the quality, governance, and degree of investigation.

**Federal and State Regulations.** From 2003 to 2018, U.S. states have adopted data breach notification laws, potentially creating inter-state variables. Yet it is unclear whether data breach notifications at the state or federal level enhance the quality of cybersecurity risk disclosures or restrain managers’ discretion in determining the timeliness of disclosures. How do differences in cybersecurity breach notification regulations affect firms’ disclosure policies? Moreover, do data breach notification laws enhance the quality of cybersecurity risk disclosures? Further, future research can investigate whether differences between federal and state regulations result in conflicting cybersecurity risk disclosure incentives.

**Management Incentives.** We do not identify any studies relating to how management incentives affect cybersecurity disclosure. Currently, it is unknown if management incentives such as executive compensation are associated with cybersecurity risk disclosure. If so, future research can identify specific incentives. Can incentives to promote overall firm transparency spillover to cybersecurity? Additionally, research should investigate how corporate governance affects cybersecurity disclosure, and how cybersecurity risk disclosure relates to governance’s goal of overall firm transparency. For instance, is the composition of a firm’s board of directors a determinant of disclosure (e.g., level of information technology experience of board members)?

##### Impact of Cybersecurity Risk Disclosure
Prior studies identify only one risk-inducing item (trade secrets) in cybersecurity risk disclosures that is associated with an increased likelihood of future cybersecurity incidents. We therefore encourage future research to explore other potential factors in cybersecurity risk disclosures. The positive association between cybersecurity risk disclosure and future cybersecurity incidents could depend on factors such as industry- or firm-specific characteristics, geographic location, or customers’ distribution. Although Wang et al. (2013) document that disclosing risk-mitigating information reduces the likelihood of future cybersecurity incidents, it remains unclear what risk-mitigating information items might contain. Future studies may further explore those risk-mitigating items and identify them specifically. Further, future research can investigate how cybersecurity risk disclosures relate to future incidents and whether a firm’s cybersecurity practices change after a cybersecurity incident. Specifically, does disclosing cybersecurity risk reduce or increase the likelihood of future cybersecurity incidents? Would disclosing risk-mitigating items attenuate their positive impact on mitigating future cybersecurity incidents?

We believe that investigating the relationship between cybersecurity incidents and firms’ risk-inducing and mitigating factors, and their disclosures, is a particularly rich research area. The AICPA’s cybersecurity risk management reporting framework recommends description criteria and control criteria as essential for effective cybersecurity examination and reporting (AICPA 2017a). Description criteria are used by management to explain risk management policies and can be used by external auditors in their assessment of management’s assertions. Control criteria are used by external auditors in their assessment of the effectiveness of management’s internal controls over cybersecurity risks. As a part of the AICPA’s Security and Organization Controls (SOC) program, the AICPA recommends that these two cybersecurity-related criteria be integrated into type I and II SOC reports (AICPA 2017c). Applied to SOC reporting, description criteria correspond closely to type I SOC reports, which examine management’s assertions without testing except to confirm existence and design. Control criteria correspond to type II reports, which involve substantive testing of controls (AICPA 2017c). The two AICPA cybersecurity criteria used to structure current cybersecurity disclosures and their impact on SOC reporting are important areas for future research. Using cybersecurity criteria could directly impact cybersecurity disclosure practices. Potential research questions include: Are disclosure differences relative to descriptive and control criteria related to the risk of future cybersecurity incidents? Are predominantly descriptive criteria disclosures associated with cybersecurity incidents to a greater degree than predominantly control criteria disclosures? Is disclosing both descriptive and control criteria associated with a lower chance of future cybersecurity incidents?

On a more general note, our literature review suggests that research is needed on whether there is additional risk in disclosing cybersecurity control information. Do incrementally informative cybersecurity disclosures have a different impact on the likelihood of future cybersecurity incidents than do boilerplate disclosures? Future research could also investigate if firms are aware of the additional risk in making cybersecurity disclosure control; if so, what approach can be taken for cybersecurity risk mitigation? Do high-risk firms disclose cybersecurity risk differently than low-risk firms? Are there tone or sentiment differences among disclosures?

#### Cybersecurity Investment
##### Cybersecurity Investment Optimization
Although prior studies note a variety of factors that may enhance cybersecurity investment, there is still a lack of empirical evidence showing the relationship between these factors and future cybersecurity incidents. For instance, it is unclear what constitutes an optimal cybersecurity investment. What exactly is involved in management’s decision-making process to determine a firm’s cybersecurity investment? We suggest that an especially fruitful area of potential research is the extent to which the cybersecurity decision-making process aligns with COSO’s ERM framework (COSO 2017). Similarity with COSO ERM could not only have investment decision research ramifications but also practical firm and audit level implications. Do differences in the decision-making process exist among firms? How do executives’ prior experiences impact firms’ cybersecurity investments? Additionally, it is unknown as to how cybersecurity investment fits into a firm’s capital investment and budgeting procedures. Is it a regular, recurring part of these procedures or periodic and reactionary to the occurrence of cybersecurity incidents?

##### Impact of Cybersecurity Investment
After surveying the extant literature, the association between cybersecurity investment and future cybersecurity incidents remains inconclusive. Future studies should further investigate this relationship. Overall, studies predominantly explore factors that increase benefits or reduce overall costs. Intuitively, appropriate cybersecurity investment should be related to the probability of future cybersecurity incidents. However, existing studies are all theoretical in nature, and therefore do not provide empirical evidence on cybersecurity investment effectiveness. Specifically, future research could examine whether the relationship between cybersecurity investment and future cybersecurity incidents depends on cost-benefit factors such as information sharing or managers’ proactive mitigations. Which cybersecurity investment factors most impact the likelihood of future cybersecurity incidents? On a more practical note, it is unknown whether cybersecurity insurance is an effective risk management tool. Does cybersecurity insurance reduce the likelihood or severity of future cybersecurity incidents? Future research can leverage the more established information technology security investment literature when examining the effectiveness and overall impact of cybersecurity investment.

#### Information Security Governance
##### Characteristics and Support of Management
Extant studies provide only a general overview of the relationship between senior management’s IT-related expertise and future cybersecurity incidents. According to our research review, no studies have focused on security-related expertise such as information security-related education, training, or certificates. Future research can investigate the impact of such specific security-related expertise on the likelihood of future cybersecurity incidents. For example, how do technology committees within firms’ boards of directors or executives manage cybersecurity activities? What is the composition of the technology committees? Similarly, the composition of the management team over cybersecurity has not been investigated. Has the management team received any specific education, training, or certificates related to cybersecurity? What is the role of management’s non-cybersecurity personal traits and characteristics? Although prior studies document that senior management support has a positive cybersecurity impact, there remains a dearth of empirical evidence indicating whether senior management support has an impact on future cybersecurity investment. Future research can empirically test this relationship, for example, do information technology managers’ compensation structure incentivize a response to cybersecurity concerns? Is there a change in compensation and bonus structure following a cybersecurity incident?

##### Internal Audit
The internal audit function intersects with cybersecurity in many ways. Steinbart et al. (2018) note that the control and improvement of information security is not only the responsibility of the information technology function but also the internal audit function. What is the role of internal audit in promoting cybersecurity? Future research could examine how internal auditors monitor and evaluate cybersecurity activities, report production, and the overall relationship between the internal audit function and a firm’s cybersecurity strategy. Similarly, our research review indicates that it is unknown whether the internal audit function assists in identifying and remediating cybersecurity incidents or differences between cybersecurity activities and data privacy concerns. Thus, we suggest that research examines the degree to which the internal audit function is consulted by the board of directors, senior management, or cybersecurity management teams about cybersecurity and by which channels (formal or informal). Do internal auditors promote cybersecurity risk disclosures, and if so, do they assist in reducing litigation risk?

Communication is an essential part of a firm’s internal controls system and its risk management strategy (COSO 2013, 2017, COBIT 2012). Accordingly, future cybersecurity research might investigate the relationships between a firm’s communication network and cybersecurity, especially in regard to the internal audit function. How does communication type (e.g., participative versus authoritarian) and quality (e.g., high versus low) affect the likelihood of cybersecurity incidents? Do cybersecurity investment type and quality affect the overall cybersecurity risk disclosures? Further, communication between internal and external auditors could affect cybersecurity activities, including internal and external risk, incidents, and disclosures. Can greater internal and external audit communication result in synergies between cybersecurity testing and disclosures? Do cybersecurity disclosures reduce external auditor litigation risk? Future cybersecurity research focused on the internal audit function might also consider the broader, joint effect of ERP systems on the internal audit function and cybersecurity activities (e.g., Weidenmier and Ramamoorti 2006). ERP systems have a significant impact on a firm’s information environment that could impact cybersecurity activities. Does the impact of the internal audit function depend on internal information environment quality? Can technology sophistication moderate the internal audit function’s impact on cybersecurity?

##### Internal Control Compliance and Effectiveness
Prior research on cybersecurity and information security has examined the role of senior management, the importance of the internal audit function, and internal control compliance and effectiveness using internal control frameworks promulgated by COSO (2013, 2017) and COBIT (2012). Future research can explore other factors mentioned in internal control frameworks that have not yet been investigated. For example, the COSO ERM framework notes that high-level organization strategies need to align with operations, reporting, and compliance activities (COSO 2017). How do a firm’s strategic objectives incorporate cybersecurity concerns? Future research may also investigate the effect of a conflict of interests within an organization on cybersecurity effectiveness. How does a firm’s overall control environment (e.g., tone at the top) affect cybersecurity controls’ effectiveness and cybersecurity disclosures?

We know of no published research examining the AICPA’s cybersecurity risk management reporting framework (AICPA 2017a). Nevertheless, this is a potentially important area to be explored, since research could have both regulatory and practical implications. How can the AICPA framework be applied within a firm? The AICPA framework delineates two criteria for cybersecurity examination and reporting: descriptive and control. Does management or do cybersecurity disclosures use these criteria? Utilizing the AICPA cybersecurity framework could raise awareness of cybersecurity risks and the importance of timely detection of cybersecurity incidents within a firm. Can implementation of the framework reduce the likelihood of a future cybersecurity incident? Can cybersecurity “best practices” be identified and implemented from this framework or others (e.g., COBIT 5)?

#### Market Response to Cybersecurity Incidents and Spillover Effect
##### Market Response to Cybersecurity Incidents
Overall, empirical evidence indicates that the market responds negatively to reports of cybersecurity incidents. However, our understanding of long-term reactions to cybersecurity incidents is somewhat vague and in need of broad interdisciplinary research. We suggest the need for more research comparing short- and long-term reactions. The true impact of cybersecurity incidents, in various contexts, remains an empirical question. Are there differences in the severity of market responses depending on different types of cybersecurity incidents? What factors and situations, such as the investor base, affect short-term market reactions? For example, is there increased activist investor interest following a negative market reaction to a cybersecurity incident? Do professional and nonprofessional investors react similarly to cybersecurity incidents?

Our review indicates that little, if any, research examines how the market reacts to various types of cybersecurity disclosures, such as the risk of cybersecurity incidents besides incident reporting. For example, do prior non-incident cybersecurity disclosures affect market reactions to actual incidents for a particular firm? Research is needed as to how firms can mitigate negative market reactions related to cybersecurity incidents. Can cybersecurity insurance or auditor-provided cybersecurity services mitigate a negative market reaction to a cybersecurity incident?

##### Capital Market Spillover Effect
Although prior studies have found robust evidence that the equity market has a negative reaction to cybersecurity incidents, there has been a paucity of research examining the debt market’s response, despite the fact that debt is an even more important source of capital for many firms than equity. According to Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA) data, the bond market had more than triple the relative to the equity market by the end of 2016 (SIFMA 2019). Further, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) asserts that financial statements are intended for both external investors and creditors (Holhausen and Watts 2010). How does the debt market react to cybersecurity incidents? Future research can explore whether debt market participants, such as public bondholders, credit rating agencies, or bank loan officers, also react negatively to cybersecurity incidents.

There are several other cybersecurity spillover effects that could be fruitful future research areas. For example, do actions or security investments made by peer firms improve control quality and/or mitigate the extent of a negative market reaction? Cybersecurity incident spillover effects could also cause peer firms to experience a negative stock reaction when a firm in the same industry announces a cybersecurity incident. How broad of an impact does a cybersecurity incident have on other peer firms? Indirect cybersecurity spillover could also occur between the market and other stakeholders. For example, how does the market react to cybersecurity incidents when firms disclose supplier-customer relationships or board of directors interlock? Can security governance factors mitigate the spillover?

#### Manager, Auditor, and Customer Responses and Remedial Strategies
##### Manager, Auditor, and Customer Responses
Prior studies investigating managers’ post-incident reactions are very limited. Therefore, future studies can explore post-incident reactions, including CEO and CIO compensation and turnover. For example, are there changes in CEO and CIO compensation? Also, are concerns from interested stakeholders considered by managers when determining whether to provide a cybersecurity risk disclosure? Post-cybersecurity incident, management is likely concerned about reputation loss and how compliance or litigation issues affect a firm’s risk or profitability. Research can examine the subsequent manager decision-making process and the use of security investments. Does the source of disclosure, whether internal or external to the firm (e.g., the firm itself versus the SEC, media, or a law/accounting firm), cause different management responses?

The mixed results from our review of auditor response studies suggest the need for future research examining the association between cybersecurity and audit risk. Future research can center on the nature of breaches and industry influence on audit engagements. Studies might also examine other measures of audit quality (e.g., non-audit fees, audit opinion, and auditor turnover) in the period surrounding a cybersecurity incident. How do auditor-provided attestation and assurance services affect cybersecurity? It is unknown whether additional cybersecurity disclosures are necessary when the auditor is involved in a firm’s cybersecurity activities. Do auditors remain independent when providing cybersecurity attestation services? How do external stakeholders, including investors, perceive firms that suffer a cybersecurity incident but have received auditor-provided cybersecurity attestation services?

In relation to customer responses to cybersecurity incidents, future research could explore whether factors, including insurance and prior cybersecurity incidents, mediate or moderate the negative association between cybersecurity incidents and reduced customer spending or satisfaction. In addition, it is unclear if cybersecurity incidents have a long-term negative impact on customer behavior. If so, are there differences solely within customers’ short-term reactions or also within long-term reactions?

In summary, prior studies have explored the impact of cybersecurity incidents from the perspectives of managers, external auditors, and customers. Other stakeholders have not been examined by the extant literature. For example, since cybersecurity incidents affect future sales and incur recovery costs, professional analysts could also react to data breaches and adjust their forecasts. How do analysts’ forecasts differ pre- and post-incident? Do cybersecurity incidents impact analysts’ forecast accuracy? Additionally, cybersecurity incidents could affect supply-chain relationships. Do suppliers adjust their trading credits or supply-chain-related investment after customers’ cybersecurity incidents?

##### Remedial Strategies Following Cybersecurity Incidents
There is very little research, especially in accounting, discussing recovery strategies or mechanisms and their efficacy for firms that experience cybersecurity incidents. We call for future research to examine recovery strategies, methodologies, technical frameworks, and firm behavior. In the previous sections, we discuss factors that could help reduce future cybersecurity risk, including corporate governance and internal control mechanisms. However, there remains a dearth of studies on the techniques and strategies used by affected firms to recover. A cybersecurity incident is not a single monolithic event. Accordingly, what remedial actions do breached firms take to address the cybersecurity incidents (e.g., mitigate losses, improve recovery, repair reputation, and reduce future risk) remain open questions. Are changes made in operations or corporate governance to improve stakeholders’ perception of firm reputation? Have firms implemented predetermined cybersecurity recovery plans similar to other types of information technology disasters? To what extent do firms rely on developments in the computer science and management information systems disciplines to address cybersecurity incident recovery? How have cybersecurity incidents affected research and development budgets?

---

### V. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
This paper performs an integrative review of the extant cybersecurity research in academic journals from 2011 through 2019 in order to synthesize the literature and identify opportunities for future research. We provide a detailed collective overview of cybersecurity research in academic journals in accounting and other business disciplines. We classify prior cybersecurity research into five broad topical areas: cybersecurity risk disclosure, cybersecurity investment, information security governance, capital market reaction and spillover effect, and manager, auditor, and customer responses to cybersecurity incidents and remedial strategies. These streams of cybersecurity factors facilitate the identification of future synergistic research opportunities.

Our review provides a timely and thorough summary and synthesis of the burgeoning cybersecurity literature. Given the growing role and importance of cybersecurity within a firm, we identify the need for additional interdisciplinary research. A firm’s cybersecurity activities could be influenced by many internal and external factors, including executive characteristics, auditor expertise, and market responses. The development of applicable cybersecurity solutions could benefit from incorporating cybersecurity research from outside the accounting discipline. Regulators and standard setters could also find meaningful insights in our review of the extant academic cybersecurity research. New AICPA guidance on cybersecurity-related attestation services designed to test firms’ cybersecurity controls creates an opportunity to examine the impact of cybersecurity attestation services on disclosures, market reactions, controls, and managers’ actions (AICPA 2017b). With a rapidly rising rate and cost of data breaches (Newman 2017, Ponemon Institute 2019), future research can also provide timely evidence on internal control effectiveness and the impact of cybersecurity investments.

---

### REFERENCES
- Aiello, C. 2018. Under Armour says data breach affected about 150 million MyFitnessPal accounts. Available at: https://www.cnbc.com/2018/3/29/under-armour-stock-falls-after-company-admits-data-breach.html
- American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA). 2017a. AICPA unveils cybersecurity risk management reporting framework. Available at: https://www.aicpa.org/press/pressreleases/2017/aicpa-unveils-cybersecurity-risk-management-reporting-framework.html
- American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA). 2017b. Description Criteria for Management’s Description of an Entity’s Cybersecurity Risk Management Program. New York, NY: AICPA.
- American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA). 2017c. SOC for Cybersecurity: Helping You Build Trust and Transparency. New York, NY: AICPA.
- Amir, E., S. Levi, and T. Livne. 2018. Do firms underreport information on cyber-attacks? Evidence from capital markets. *Review of Accounting Studies* 23 (3): 1177–1266. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11142-018-9542-4
- Angs, C., M. E. S. Block, J. D. Arcy, and K. Kelley. 2017. When do IT security investments matter? Accounting for the influence of information matters in the context of healthcare data breaches. *Management Information Systems Quarterly* 41 (3): 999–1016.
- Brown, S., X. Tian, and J. Tucker. 2018. [Title not provided in the document]. *Journal of Accounting and Public Policy*.
- Center for Internet Security (CIS). 2019. CIS Controls Version 7.1.
- Cheng, L., and S. Walton. 2019. [Title not provided in the document].
- COBIT. 2012. [Title not provided in the document].
- COSO. 2013. Internal Control—Integrated Framework.
- COSO. 2017. Enterprise Risk Management—Integrating with Strategy and Performance.
- Dewar, R. 2014. [Title not provided in the document].
- Dunu-Cavety, M. 2010. [Title not provided in the document].
- Ettredge, M., F. Guo, and Y. Li. 2018. Trade secrets and cybersecurity breaches. *Journal of Accounting and Public Policy* 37 (6): 544–585. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccpubpol.2018.10.006
- Fang, F., M. Parameswaran, X. Zhao, and A. B. Whinston. 2014. An economic mechanism to manage operational security risks for inter-organizational information systems. *Information Systems Frontiers* 16 (3): 399–416. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-013-9448-y
- Feng, C., and T. Wang. 2018. Does CIO risk appetite matter? Evidence from information security breach incidents. *International Journal of Accounting Information Systems* 32 (1): 59–75.
- Fleishman, G. 2018. [Title not provided in the document].
- Gordon, L. A., M. P. Loeb, and W. Lucyshyn. 2006. [Title not provided in the document].
- Greenberg, A. 2018. [Title not provided in the document].
- Haapamäki, E., and J. Silvonen. 2019. [Title not provided in the document]. *Managerial Auditing Journal*.
- Hemmer, T. 2018. [Title not provided in the document].
- Holhausen, R. W., and R. L. Watts. 2010. [Title not provided in the document].
- International Telecommunications Union (ITU). 2018. [Title not provided in the document].
- Islam, M. S., N. Farah, and T. F. Stafford. 2018. Factors associated with security/cybersecurity audit by internal audit function: An international study. *Managerial Auditing Journal* 33 (4): 377–409. https://doi.org/10.1108/MAJ-07-2017-1595
- Ku, C., and M. Firoozi. 2019. [Title not provided in the document].
- Lawrence, A., M. Minuti-Meza, and D. Vyas. 2018. [Title not provided in the document].
- National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). 2019. [Title not provided in the document].
- Newman, L. H. 2017. [Title not provided in the document].
- Ponemon Institute. 2019. Cost of a Data Breach Study.
- Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB). 2007. SEC approves PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 5, An Audit of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Adopts definition of “significant deficiency.” Available at: https://www.sec.gov/news/press/2007/2007-144
- Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB). 2015. Standing Advisory Group Meeting Panel Discussion—Cybersecurity. Available at: [URL not provided in the document].
- Richardson, V. J., S. W. Smith, and M. W. Watson. 2019. [Title not provided in the document].
- Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA). 2019. [Title not provided in the document].
- Silvestein, J. 2019. [Title not provided in the document].
- Spanos, G., and L. Angelis. 2016. [Title not provided in the document].
- Steinbart, P. J., et al. 2018. [Title not provided in the document].
- Tan, S., and J. Yu. 2018. [Title not provided in the document].
- Von Solms, R., and J. Van Niekerk. 2013. [Title not provided in the document].
- Wang, T., et al. 2013. [Title not provided in the document].
- Weidenmier, M. L., and S. Ramamoorti. 2006. [Title not provided in the document].

---

### COPYRIGHT
Copyright of *Journal of Information Systems* is the property of American Accounting Association and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder’s express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.